David Sinclair lifespan why we age and
why we don't have to I'm so happy
there are people like you out there
because I don't want to age I'm aging
clearly but uh I'm not interested in it
I don't like it
yeah well I don't know anybody who does
Joe Rogan thanks having me back on
thanks for coming back
the first one was a smash hit man people
loved it all my friends were very
excited but I had a question for you
right off the bat regarding metformin
there was actually an article I'm sure
you saw it recently like within the last
couple of days that was going around
through all the mainstream papers it was
talking about how for the use of
metformin DHEA and was there something
else as well that was taking two years
human growth hormone taking two years to
biological years off of people's lives
in terms of their their age which are
natural eight which actually I'm 52 it
would make me 50 right even 49.54 yeah
that was act 2 the good study you know
it's only nine people so we have to
repeat this will they studs did you get
like nine super athletes or did you get
like schmoes that don't exercise I as
far as I know these were just regular
Schmalz yeah which is good news like me
yes good news yeah I mean that's what
you want you don't want like some people
just respond better they have super
bodies you know look what great thing
about that study is first of all I was
with the first the main author on that
paper while it came out I was over in
Israel as part of my journey up the the
great rift of Africa ended up in Israel
anyway the guy there
Steve Horvath is his name he and I and a
couple of other guys are trying to
figure out not just why we age why we
don't have to but is aging truly
reversible and that's what this study
suggests is that it's not just about
slowing down aging but one day we could
be 80 but biologically 30 now when we're
talking about the biological age how is
that measured this is measured by the
length of the telomeres is this measured
physical performance is it mentioned by
a combination of these factors it's none
of that
not something brand-new most people
don't know about it so it's called the
Horvath clock and what Horvath and
others have discovered is that if you
read the DNA and you don't just look at
the letters ACTG if you look at what's
on the letter see sizing is called there
are chemical modifications and those
chemicals change as we get older in very
linear and predictable ways and if you
use a computer ai you can say if I took
your blood sample right now I could read
your DNA
look at those chemical groups on the C's
and I could say you are ok 52 you might
be 46 according to that clock and also I
could predict when you're gonna die whoa
scary thought right yeah like a
fortune-teller
yeah but the good news is well now that
we know what's not just measuring aging
we actually think that clock is part of
the aging process we're learning how to
reverse it - hmm
now is this just one modality this this
combination of growth hormone is this
one way of going about it
are there other ways of going about it
growth hormone DHEA metformin is there
anything else well that's the first
that's a vengeance just those three
things but I'm sure there's gonna be
many more discovered we've only had this
whole Dethklok over the last few years
in humans being used widely but I think
as we use this clock we're going to
figure out that whole bunch of stuff
that we do and things that we can do and
combine will not just slow aging but
reverse it and not just by two and a
half years eventually and some of the
technology that I talk about in my book
we think could turn the clock back by a
decade or more whoa
now what things are you talking about
that could possibly turn it back a
decade or more well so the and who do I
have to blow sorry yeah you can blow me
but yeah you may have to do it a few
times but the amazing thing about where
we are now today with aging and we're
right on the cutting edge so it's great
to be able to share this with your
listeners is this clock it's changed on
the DNA right
what I'm saying in my theory of of aging
is that it's not the DNA that we lose
that's the old theory you know the old
idea that antioxidants hurt the Dean yes
just throw that out for a while
maybe forever what I think is going on
is that the DNA is getting modified and
the cell can't read the DNA the way it
used to okay that's really important and
so the clock is not just a clock it's
not a clock on the wall it's also if you
move the hands of the clock time changes
that's what I think is going on could we
pause right here for a moment and
explain what you were saying about
antioxidants
well antioxidants have been the biggest
disappointment in the aging field
doesn't stop you know forty million
people every day buying drinks with
antioxidants in them but antioxidants
have with very few exceptions failed to
extend the life span of any organism but
you are a proponent of resveratrol at
least you used to be are you still I
still take it and we still study it in
my lab but what's you brought this up is
really important resveratrol was
originally thought to be an antioxidant
and it is a mild antioxidant but the way
it really works we know this is a fact
from my lab is that it's stimulating the
body's defenses against aging and
disease because it's it's binding to
these enzymes that we work on called
sirtuins and these are the defenders of
the body and you were saying the if I
remember correctly you take resveratrol
you take a powdered form actually bought
exactly what you take and you mix it
with yogurt in the morning is a how you
do it yep what's the dose that you take
well it probably comes out to about a
gram in a gram yeah okay so if someone's
taking capsules what depends if it
probably capsules at 250 milligrams
that'd be okay before yeah you know I'm
still alive so that's its look good oh
thank you do you um is it important to
take it with fats is that why you take
it with yogurt yeah yeah either high
protein which is Greek yogurt surfaces
or fat but water ill it's like brick
dust it won't dissolve and absorbed but
a glass of whole milk maybe would be
okay yeah that's great
it has to have something to bind to is
that the deal for sure yeah in in our
studies in humans and in mice if we
didn't give them high-fat food it barely
got in it was fivefold less now this
study of metformin DHEA and human growth
hormone does not include nmn right so
but nmn is also effective
well let's delve in a little bit please
if you read the paper and I have turns
out one of the effects of this treatment
was the reduction in the levels of a
protein called cd38 cd38 resides on
immune cells and it goes up as we get
older and what they found one of the
biggest effects of the treatment was the
levels of this city 30 a protein went
down so what is the CD 38 this is the
main enzyme in our bodies that degrades
nad nad is required for the sore - and
defenders to work so one possibility is
that and I'm sure it's complicated but
one way this could be working is by
allowing your body to make nad and store
it rather than degrading it as we get
older
interesting so would supplementing with
nmn which is a form of nad correct a
precursor yeah precursor would that
enhance the effects do you believe like
if they try to do a new study it could
could it could potential each of these
patients cost ten thousand dollars for
the treatment so it's it's not easy to
do these studies ten thousand dollars
for the entirety of the treatment and
the treatment lasts how long I don't
remember how long they treated the
patients for but I do know that it
wasn't cheap that's why they only did
nine because I've first I said to my
friend Steve Horvath nine patients you
kidding me why didn't you do fifty and I
went well we didn't have the money
that's the that's the plan anyway my
point really is that we need to test a
lot of different combinations include
anim and include there's one called
rapamycin which is a little bit more
risky and toxic but there are better
molecules in development the question is
what is the best combination and do you
use it with exercise and fasting or is
it bad to combine them all together we
don't know yet
that's a good question to that I wanted
to ask you because one of the things
that came out of the podcast was input
from some other people that I know that
are nutrition experts and performance
experts that were skeptical about
metformin and they were saying that
metformin although it may have an
anti-aging effect it actually decreases
physical performance and athletes well
that there is a study that shows that
and resveratrol to actually real can
prevent the great gains from hard
exercise so here's the solution that I
think is worth trying a solution and
that is a theme that I have in my book
and in my research and that is we don't
want to be doing everything every day
necessarily we want to pulse it we want
to shock the body and let it recover we
know that you can't just exercise I mean
some people have been on this show run
100 miles every every weekend but
generally you want to hit it hard and
let it recover here at hardly recover so
what I am planning to do and actually
started doing is on days that I'm
exercising and recovering I don't take
Matt Foreman and then when I'm just
sitting around or on a plane I do and
that way I think that my body can have
the best of both worlds so when you are
not exercising and you take it you feel
like it doesn't have a hit when you are
exercising and not taking it so it
somehow or another whatever performance
hit it has its temporary yeah right so
well this is all just theoretical it is
we're right on the cutting edge of human
knowledge we don't actually know what
the best thing is but my best guess is
that we want to allow the body to
recover so I don't take my Foreman on
those days rather than taking metformin
every day like a diabetic would mm-hmm
now what are what is the what's that hit
like what is happening what's the
mechanism behind the performance hit
from taking metformin oh we don't know
but I can tell you the best explanation
that I can give you somet Foreman is a
derivative of a plant molecule the
French lilac so it's not a crazy
molecule it's pretty natural but what it
does is many things in the body
scientists will quite annoyingly argue
about it for they have for the last 40
years so there's no correct answer but
what I think is going on is that
metformin is
interfering with the mitochondrial
mitochondria in the cell mitochondria
that we call the battery packs they're
basically making chemical energy without
that chemical energy we'd be dead in
about 20 seconds so we need that for
life so metformin interrupts that energy
production in the mitochondria but you
need the mitochondria to amplify after
you've exercised so they're they're
antagonizing each other so why does
metformin work by inhibiting the
mitochondria the body gets a signal that
it doesn't have enough chemical energy
it's not making enough so it expands the
number of mitochondria these are ancient
remnants of bacteria that entered
ourselves and we have less if we sit
around and like we are now and we have
more if we exercise in metformin by
telling the body shit we're running out
of energy the body responds it makes
more mitochondria just like exercise
does but I think if you're taking
metformin and exercising that inhibition
is preventing the benefits somehow of
what you get with exercise perhaps
preventing your house so like what what
did the study or what studies have been
done and what did they reveal I don't
remember the precise details of the
study it was it was giving metformin
every day to people who were in a
controlled exercise I think was
treadmill a few times a week but then
what they measured was the mitochondrial
benefit now that and I think they
measured a bit of strength so confusing
that there's a Mitel mitochondrial
benefit but a performance hit well no
they actually the metformin prevented
the mitochondria from amplifying up oh
all right so then it must be interfering
with the signal that you get from
exercise whatever that is we don't know
exactly what that is so you'd really
have to be some sort of a guinea pig to
try to fuck with this stuff to go back
and forth from taking it and exercising
not taking it yeah and I'm sorry I'm one
of those guinea pigs
yeah and what do you no disrespect but
how hard are you working out not enough
yeah I'm saying spend three hours a week
in the gym that's not bad it's all in
one day that's maintenance oh one day
yeah really one day three hours yeah
that's ridiculous
that way cuz I miss Maura but you're so
smart
that drives me crazy when smart people
do dumb shit
like I had Peter Hotez on the podcast
who's a brilliant man in from the
University of Texas he's a researcher in
tropical diseases and he's obsessed with
diseases and the importance of
vaccinations all these different things
things talking about how his diet is
terrible
junk food it's constantly jackin the-box
and shit I'm like what the fuck man
you're so smart and you're a guy who
works on diseases what's the number-one
cause of diseases oh yeah I don't get
that some of my clothes I ate the worst
food and they studied longevity crazy
it's crazy it's like they can't help
their impulses it's like there's so many
people like that that are obsessed with
various aspects of health or performance
but they just they just can't get it
together well I would work out more if I
had time I'm usually working till
midnight and after that I'm not really
you do have an excuse you have a crazy
work schedule you do have an excuse yeah
well I'm on planes Fitbit so I try to
exercise on the planes pretty hard do
you really want to do um you guys a
trash room you know squats so no he
thinks you're crazy yeah I've got a pee
lottery doing blow in there or something
yeah people think you're in there doing
meth yeah doing something in there once
yeah um so what do you do when you work
out I lift weights for an hour then do a
fair bit of stretching and then and then
actually do some hot and cold treatment
oh okay yeah you remember we did the
cryotherapy last time yes yeah that was
fantastic yeah you won't do it again
today yes I do fantastic Amanda yeah no
planning on doing it today I did hot
yoga
earlier so I like to do hot yoga in the
morning and then cryo after a podcast
that's how I like to mix it up all right
let's do it
all right I don't have a cryo handy at
my place but I do the sauna and then
cold tub and you should get a cryo
setup they're not that expensive you get
one what about these infrared boxes are
they any good
Oh first saunas I do not know but um
some people swear by them Laird Hamilton
who were talking about by the way
huggers are coughing his Fantasticks my
hand will tompa superfood coffee well
we'll get you more
Oh Jeff is going off to pick up our
Pablo Escobar mugshot picture I'm
obsessed with mug shots for some strange
reason we can collecting new mug shot
pictures we've got a giant Pablo Escobar
it's very nice the Laird Hamilton stuff
is that's got turmeric it's got a
coconut milk it's organic coffee I'm so
addicted to it I drink that stuff like
water yeah I'm gonna have to get myself
some yeah it's delicious he saw me he
could just you don't need a machine
either you can mix it yourself he has
all the stuff you just pour it into
coffee yeah I mean he's he's a hero of
mine he's a stud he's 50 something
there's a thousand years old guy runs
mountains fucking surfs things hauls the
Empire State Building he's a very
interesting character the last I saw him
I was watching something on Instagram I
saw him in a sauna with oven mitts on
riding a bike like one of those eco
bikes like those rogue you know those
aerosol bikes riding one of those
fucking things in a sauna I was doing
his sauna routine I did not like it I
was cranking the song up to 220 degrees
and I think I cooked my lungs a little
bit not bad but people who listen to the
podcasts afterwards my apologies because
I was I was coughing like that for like
four or five episodes and then I had
decided okay this is fucking stupid like
I don't think this is good for me right
well you know hormesis yes what doesn't
kill you make sure you live longer
that's not exactly true booze booze
doesn't kill you but it definitely
doesn't make you live longer that is
true have you drink how hard every night
kills me yes if you look at two people
one that drinks hard and their brother
who drinks water and runs all the time
boy that water drinking guy looks
fucking fantastic
doesn't he a comparison well yeah that's
probably another one of my vices I gotta
lay off the all goes yeah well how much
do you drink I'd probably have one or
two a day when I'm on vacation like you
I overdo it I just got back from
vacation it's my body's way out of shape
yeah I get fat on vacation man last time
I was on vacation I was doing this I was
grabbing my size girl in Italy I went
hard
I was drinking wine ever
I was drinking about a half a bottle of
wine every night I was eating pasta all
day long but I when I'm on vacation I
just go fuck it
and also it kind of gives me a little
project when I come back you know like
all right now it's time to get serious
right right well look I was in Africa
recently and I got to tell you one of
the when you see a wildebeest get
attacked and chewed on for forty five
minutes by a crocodile nothing better
than going back to the camp and having a
beard or to calm down so I do a lot of
that so when you were on safari how did
you when when are you in one of those
open jeep deals yeah a lot of that we
did also some hiking we had Maasai
leaders that would go out and with a
federal officer with gun to protect us
oh Christ
oh it was fun it's so much so different
than being in a jeep to walk among the
cats oh yeah man you got a sure you're
almost dead yeah it's like you're right
there you feel like you're alive you
know how you get the feeling of what it
was like to be an early human I've never
encountered anything other than bears in
the woods that are terrifying I've never
seen a mountain lion while like hunting
I've only seen two mountain lines ever
one was from my back porch in Colorado
and one was in the street in Santa
Barbara I was driving and I saw one run
across the street right I didn't realize
it was a mountain lion until I saw the
tail it's like oh shit I thought it was
a coyote or something and I saw that
long tail but while hunting I've the
only thing I've ever seen is a grizzly
bear
so our grizzly bear once I've seen black
bears black bears are unnerving grizzly
bears are terrifying they look at you
like this you could shoot them and
they'll still go they just look right
through you
they look like am i eating you what's
going on with you I'm gonna eat you like
they're trying to black bear so like oh
should I get out of here should I run am
I the boss or you the boss like they're
not sure grizzly bears are fucking sure
that the boss who's trying to figure out
whether or not they should eat you right
and actually one of the things you
realize when you're amongst these
animals it's a huge privilege for us to
go for a walk without getting eaten yes
yeah we don't think about it that way
because we're so used to being in parks
and oh I'm out in nature the fuck you
are you're not really in nature here and
some weird sort
nature preserve that we've sort of set
up inside cities right and people ask me
about my work Oh
isn't what you're doing unnatural fuck
natural what about our weld is natural
anyway brushing your teeth isn't
naturally they're stupid right yeah what
you born with a toothbrush in your hand
shut up right right well blue over here
what it at 30,000 feet drinking a
cocktail surfing internet I know it's so
natural that's natural you're getting
bombarded by solar radiation yeah you're
boozing it up you're also somehow or
another online no way than anybody's
ever gotta be able to explain to me that
my puny brains can understand right yeah
exactly
well yeah don't give me the argument
that aging is natural therefore it's
acceptable lies I don't buy any of those
natural things because everything on
earth is natural even chemicals there is
we're not getting them from the stars
we're not pulling them out of other
dimensions like what are you talking
about it's all from Earth everything
right even politicals most of them
derived from plants sure in Africa is
hanging out with but what tribe these
are the pygmies they used to be in the
forest and I had the chief take me
through the forest and he was showing me
all the drugs they used to take there's
this cluster dean 'i'm i think i'm
saying it right it was a leaf they used
to chew on they'd smoke a bit of weed
they'd go a little dizzy they'd crouch
down after about 15 minutes they'd stand
up and they felt invincible they'd go
kill one of those elephants in the
jungle Jesus he's killed elephants yeah
many elephants oh the smaller elephants
yeah but now that are smaller people
right sold me out they can't except the
worms the worms were about this long oh
well my buddy Justin Ram we're a big
supporter of fight for the Forgotten
charity it's a charity that my friend
Justin Ren set up and they build wells
for the pygmies in Congo and through
this application called the cash app and
I personally don't need it too and we
also were doing benefits for them we're
doing a big benefit in LA coming up soon
that'll be announcing soon but he goes
over there all the time and he's had
malaria three times and just recently
has acquired some unknown parasite that
is just devastating his health he's
trying to figure out what it is so he's
got to go through a battery of tests and
they've got a you know examine him but
the next time he goes over there
apparently
bring his own food but I mean the
fucking poor guys got malaria three
times yeah well you should be taking his
medicine nor often I think but oh no it
recurs does it really uh well it's it
becomes systemic right it's horrific man
and the way he describes it and he's a
gorilla I mean a fucking gorilla he's a
huge man he fights for Bellator he's one
of their heavyweight contenders
contenders
so he's this you know 250 pounds stud of
a guy who goes over there and catches
he's horrific diseases and just like
barely survives when it comes and gets
the medication and comes back but then
when he gets sick sometimes it'll kick
back in again it's kicked back in there
twice another reason you don't want to
go back to natural way of life but
you're a good man Joe for supporting the
pygmies I was Justin is such a fucking
angel when you you talk to him and you
you see his documentaries that he's put
out in his films that they've done with
water for and now just with his
organization fight for the Forgotten
like he can't help but help help gosh I
was in on the Ugandan side of the
volcano Rift and the way they live was
was just it was shocking and we're gonna
help rebuild a school for them but they
need help and they're right on the edge
of civilization that the bat or tribe
the pygmies are in the worse situation
than anybody and they're they're the
lowest of the low they're picked on
racially they were kicked off their land
yeah our to save the the gorillas and
these elephants and they don't know what
to do they've got they everything they
knew how to live is gone and that crazy
they're kicked off their land to save
animals right yeah well yeah but there's
note that there's no way out you got to
do that well isn't there a way to not
kill the animals and have them all
coexist I guess you could have kept them
in they were it's a national park so you
can't easily have humans living in the
National Park I suppose you could but
they they are trying to modernize them
so they put them on this small few acres
of land which they're trying to learn
how to farm and the way they subsist is
through tourism so I would recommend
anyone who's interested go see them
support them buy a lot of stuff we I
think we bought up a quarter of the
village they love that but we're gonna
go back and do something meaningful
that's awesome
natural so we were taught we got wit off
sidetrack so you were in Africa which is
the most realistic environment if you
want to really know what nature is all
about you were in the most realistic
environment it's all tooth Fang and claw
it's like whatever survive survives and
whatever doesn't becomes food and
there's just this constant cycle going
on and you're walking around yeah now
when you walk it will you walking when
you saw the crocodile eat the wildebeest
no you're in the Jeep I was in the Jeep
for that how does a jeep thing work why
don't they just jump in the Jeep I don't
understand that oh good question and I
ask myself that as they're walking by
uh-huh
same with the gorillas that being
habituated to humans they they literally
don't even see the Jeep well the
gorillas don't they're you know they're
not aggressive unless they think you're
a threat they don't eat meat
they're just eaten plants all day yeah
there's still pretty dangerous one swipe
from a gorilla oh my god gray back with
silverback yeah it's interesting that
the jeeps have been around for so long
they just go under the Jeep they're
going to earth yeah yeah that it's as
though that jeeps aren't there you might
have six jeeps looking we saw some lines
rip apart Impala right in front of us
and they're just going about their daily
lives you see it catch it
just missed that we saw them running
away whoo
God if I saw them running in real life
I'd shit my pants without running
towards out camp so we were running the
other way I heard a horrible story about
these people that are on safari camp and
this person went to use the bathroom in
the middle of the night apparently you
know there's cabins and you have to
leave the cabin to go to the bathroom
and the cats went in the bathroom and
got them and drag them out the kiddin no
that's the worst way to go yeah it's the
hyenas you gotta watch out for because
that'll actually eat you alive oh fuck
yeah
but the locals don't like the hyenas
they don't have respect any animal that
eats another animal while it's still
screaming oh yeah they don't give a fuck
they don't try to kill you they just eat
yeah that wildebeest had a broken leg it
got away from the Croc but it was it's
it's bush meat at that point
yeah but there were there were people in
the Jeep some other Americans cheering
it was like
sport for them oh no I didn't appreciate
fucking a man it was a solemn moment
this animals gonna die and they're like
oh yeah no chasing it must be men right
uh it was mixed it was girls I'd be
super concerned though I think it was a
few but girls were cheering yeah fuck
him I didn't know I think was the guys
cheering but hard but they were chasing
this poor animal it's Fulford being
broken off and it was running on a
broken leg and now chasing it the people
are the the Jeep and the people in the
back of the Jeep yeah my kids with me
they were screaming and crying it was it
was emotional I don't want to see that
yeah yeah I I've never seen anything
take anything out in the real world it's
shocking you know you can see it on BBC
or whatever as much as you want when you
see it live my friend Johnny Hamilton he
works at a ranch in Colorado shout-out
to Johnny he was following the trail of
this gigantic elk they had seen all
these footsteps and then they'd seen
mountain lion footsteps and then there
was no more mountain lion footsteps and
then they followed it about a hundred
yards or so and they found the cat the
cat on top of the elk it had jumped on
the Elks back and killed the elk it's a
hundred fifty pound cat a 900-pound elk
a big bull and it just leaped up on its
back and just yeah like and got ahold of
its neck and dragged it to the ground
but it rode it for like a hundred yards
yeah the croc did this to to the
wildebeest yeah so elephants are
interesting we saw a lot of those and
what we learnt was that their old
elephants because they've run out of
their teeth their teeth wear down and at
some point they just can't chew anymore
so they have to find really soft stuff
eventually they die and that gives rise
to this legend that there's this
graveyard for elephants not a graveyard
it's just where the soft food is but I
was thinking if elephants had technology
they could easily solve aging they just
get dentures and yeah why can't we just
tranq them and give them some implants
yeah well they do it with people right
and I think in the zoo they might do
something like that no my ID might they
do a dog bite III bill they're wearing
out yeah I've seen that before with
people it's cool it it made sense they
gave my daughter's teeth and but I said
to the dentist
I know changing topic here but with it's
funny I said to the dentist can you fix
my teeth you just did my daughter they
went oh no you're you're almost 50 we
don't fix teeth at 50 excuse me do you
feel like you're on your way out exactly
yeah
someone said that to me went in terms of
meniscus I had a meniscus tear and they
said well when you're younger you have
more blood flow to your meniscus and we
would just surgically repair it and hope
it would fix or perhaps today you stem
cells but most likely because of your
age it's not gonna heal correctly and
I'm like okay I'm confused cuz you're
talking about blood flow like blood flow
like what is happening that's different
I don't I think this is like some old
medicine nonsense like is blood not
flowing I mean I
well it's flowing and someone with your
fitness is flowing probably as much as a
30 year old anyway I'm in better shape
than I was when I was 30 I do more shit
I do more running you know I'm like mom
I got a lot of blood flowing around man
I'm I think they compared you to
sedentary people for sure they do that's
the problem with most medicine is that
it's tailored to the average person yeah
we got to fix that it's got to be
personalized tailored yeah measured I
think if I wanted to go on safari like
that like you did
I'm have to make sure that I wasn't
around any cheering assholes like that I
got I would have to take some sort of a
solo trip and not have to be heavily
armed right and then wearing armor some
sort of armor well so that wasn't
Tanzania and a flamethrower yeah wearing
that with me right right fuck those
things man you ever see survivor man
do you know survivors yeah sure yeah
less is a great guy but he's committed
to finding Bigfoot now that's always
doing these days right yeah but anyway
less did an episode where he did
survivor man in Africa and the scenario
he would create these fakes and arrows
you know just man-made scenarios like
what if you were in a hot air balloon
and the hot air balloon got a hole in it
and crash-landed in these lion infested
territories so he literally did that
that's inside in the basket so you had a
few items in the back
get and the the flamethrower for the for
the hot air baloon with him to ward off
the fucking lions so here he is it's
nighttime in Africa and by the way he
self films everything you know the
reason why they came out with that other
show with that who's that other dude the
other dude that that got busted like
sleeping in the Holiday Inn he got just
cook he was going to the yeah Bear
Grylls he was going to the Four Seasons
at night it's like this is how you could
do it but I'm not gonna do it he would
show you how to do you could sleep in an
igloo but meanwhile he'd fucking he was
getting room service and eating steaks
and shit yeah that's why I did but Les
Stroud really does it I mean he brings a
series of cameras so this is him and
last went and he saw that it pretends
the thing crash-landed so this is his
scenario that he's created for himself
but the reality is he really is
surrounded by lions and so he has a
limited amount of propane and he would
fire out look at look look look he would
fire up that thing which is what you use
to get in the hot air balloon and scare
the shit out of lions so through the
night here the fucking zebras and shit
so he'd hear it in the middle of the
night and you have to fire that thing up
to see everybody the fuck away and then
after an hour so they fuck time to fire
it up again and so he was out there
sleeping in this basket trying yeah so
crazy he's so crazy and he would also do
these things where he would have
virtually no food for seven eight days
you know and just really just get super
super skinny and almost starved to death
that's the opposite of being in a Jeep
he's got like a bottle of water I got a
pocket knife I got some rope like this
is how you do it I got a stick
what is that oh so I'm sort of a machete
type thing fucking crazy yeah we we went
up in a balloon which was beautiful by
the way it's fun isn't it I did that in
Italy recently Wow yes anyone who's
afraid of heights don't worry it's
beautiful but we had a truck underneath
us with people with guns just in case
that happened oh that's good yeah so
there's people yeah oh there's a whole
industry in keeping people alive that
want to do stupid shit yeah
right you can imagine oh sorry the
Serengeti burnt down yet with some kind
of balloon how many different right how
many days did you go there for we
traveled for 16 days I took my whole
family marlott brother his kids how old
is the kids two nephews and my kids are
16 14 12 perfect age for this and the
they don't recommend you being under a
certain age if you're gonna take malaria
medication right
they'll did whoops really I don't I
don't I think 12 might be okay if I
think it's like under 10 or something
like that well they's you know the stuff
is heavy-duty like did it fuck with you
did you have crazy nightmares I took the
one that doesn't give you nightmares but
my other siblings had that my father
came so he's 80 and that was actually
the reason we went his 80th birthday
present oh wow that's cool what a cool
present 16 days it was it was awesome we
went Kenya Tanzania Uganda what did you
like best Tanzania is supposed to be
gorgeous
yeah Serengeti well it was all good I
really liked hanging out with the with
human beings too they're interesting
species all for sure yeah I enjoy humans
yeah I saw was the origins journey I
called it and so he went to we started
in Olduvai Gorge which is where humans
the the original fossils were found
going back a few million years Wow
and started there and then just went
through looking at the various animals
we saw the gorillas and we ended up few
days ago I was in Jerusalem looking at
where we come oh wow a real origins tour
yeah up there I think that's exciting
wow that is so cool so what was the most
unusual thing besides Jerusalem is that
the most unusual thing that's the most
insane thing where all the religions are
on top of each other
touching rocks and blessing is spring
and humans are crazy they'll worship
anything well I'm sure you've seen I was
in Germany once and were there for a UFC
and I was flipping through the channels
of the television and there was this
live feed from Mecca and this was pre
Instagram I was not on Instagram I would
definitely would have because
watched it for hours I just sat there in
my room drinking a cocktail with my feet
up watching this these people circle
around this what is that square shaped
thing in the center of Mecca yeah it was
a religious object that I believe I
think says something to do with an
asteroid like there's a piece of some
find out that makes sense this is
important to people but the the watching
people circle they're all wearing the
religious garb this Islamic garb that
they have to wear and they're all
circling around this thing like for
hours and hours and hours I'm like it's
oddly appealing like part of you wants
to go I recognize that there's got to be
a very strong sense of unity and
community and everybody agreeing that we
are all going to treat this this is a
sacred object this is a sacred place
we're gonna wear sacred clothes we're
all gonna follow this this path and this
and we're all gonna be together in this
like this like super reinforced sense of
community that's actually ordained by
God himself well we all need that
feeling for me of science and the
fossils that I and my colleagues believe
with the origins everyone needs an
origin story here it is how would you
say that
kabaah kabah it's built around a sacred
black stone a meteorite that the Muslims
believe was placed by Abraham and Ismail
Ishmael in the corner of the Kaaba a
symbol of God's covenant with Abraham
and Ishmael and by extension with the
Muslim community itself hmm okay yeah
that this so it is it is actually a
meteorite which how incredible right
like a little bit of science and a
little bit of religion all wrapped up
together there's a discovery so this
this is what it looks like so you're
watching this the channel that I was
watching in Germany again this is
probably like more than 10 years ago 12
years ago perhaps and watching this
circle around this like religious spot
it was very very captivating yeah the
one that I remember
from I think was Jerusalem yeah was
people touching the stone where the
crucifix was thought to be and there
would line up for hours to just touch it
for a few seconds meanwhile you know the
origin of humans the fossils there's
maybe two or three people hanging out no
one really cares admittedly it is out of
the way it's not in the middle of Middle
East but still it struck me that humans
are more focused on these icons of
religion rather than where I believe we
really came from Africa yeah I mean if
you look at it and you see it you touch
it you feel it it's the only sensible
explanation I mean you can still have
religion that's fine but you know don't
tell me those fossils were put there by
somebody no I mean obviously not but
it's it is that the idea that a human
being came from some lower hominid which
came originally from a shrew is so so
hard to follow like if you go all the
way back to 65 million years ago to the
asteroid hitting the Yucatan and you're
like wait what happened okay yeah big
rock smashed killed everything except
like these little rodent things and they
just eventually evolved yeah but that's
what I love about science it's amazing
it's not only amazing it's actually true
yeah we can prove it yeah me musically
you could really follow the fossil
record that's one of the funny things
and when people go oh what about the
missing link there's missing there's
holes in the fossil record well these
holes in your education just got holes
mean they got to Australia Pittacus
explaining Australia Pythias extreme
explain explain the various other human
beings you know explain explain homo
florensis explain the Neanderthal
explain all these different there's a
whole slew of different fucking things
that were human like what was that God's
experiments was God fucking around yes I
was like let's try to make them super
short and why and thick and heavy like a
five foot seven 200-pound person that's
way stronger than a person to add those
are no good listen let's get a taller
skinnier one but with bigger brains
uh-huh right and let's have them breathe
that's what we did let's bang them yeah
everybody bang I don't know if it was
marriage or rape but something happened
I think most rape
the most breeding was rape until about
like 500 years ago I agree with you do
you know that to this day there's a
country is it Kurdistan what is the the
country that 20% of all marriages
beginning kidnapping no so there's a
shame to the the female being kidnapped
she ultimately has to marry her captor
not find out that is it Kurdistan Kurt
Kyrgyzstan I'm not saying it yeah how do
you say that Kyrgyzstan her good and I
think it's Kyrgyzstan yeah
one in five girls and women kidnapped
for marriage in Kyrgyzstan how fucking
crazy this is 2019 religion yeah shame
but the fact that you could kidnap
someone rape them and then they get
shamed into marrying you
well I was shocked in Jerusalem I'm
gonna probably have a lot of hate mail
for saying this but it's a fact that
when you go to the Wailing Wall
as I didn't put little note in the wall
which was a great experience by the way
there there is a space for men and women
they're separated but the space for men
is four or five times bigger than the
one for women good yeah it's all this
disparity anyway so so as a similar
amount of women that are going to this
wall and they're just kamd into a
smaller area yeah still 2019 is this
some ordained is there some sort of a
religious yeah the Orthodox it is
parently behind that I checked it out so
there's there's an actual scripture that
says men are supposed to have this oh I
doubt that
so it's just ancient sexism well yeah
and even the wall is just tradition yeah
but anyway the history of humankind is
interesting and I did that this wall
right there was all the black spots
that's like holes grass that's like
plant material I think is it yeah yeah
yeah that plants growing out of the wall
well oh it is okay they're not black
we're just looking at low resolution
that's the women's side that's the men's
side do you remember the scene in what
is the World War Z when all those
zombies climb up the wall they pile on
top of each other like uh do you see
World War Z no fuckin great movie I
gotta say
there's a crazy scene it's a Brad Pitt
zombie movie or although all the zombies
pile up on top of each other and make it
to the top of the wall you got it James
gonna pull it up huh so they get to the
wall and look at these fucking zombie
people are climbing up yeah oh yeah oh
it's it's pretty gnarly man you've never
seen this movie
I've wanted to does the novel's are
supposed to be excellent weren't the
novels written by some famous guys son
who's who wrote them now but this is a
great scene like see they're all piling
on top of each other and they're they're
just reckless they they have no concern
for their health or well-being because
they're you know look they're dead so
they're just making this human thing and
then the soldiers are shooting into the
pile trying to knock them down but they
get over the top of the wall and they
start infecting people that's pretty
wild ass movie yeah who wrote that movie
it's a wild movie man this is well it's
one of those zombie movies where the
zombies move fast
there's slow zombie movies which come on
man
like that's why Walking Dead like I feel
like you could fuck those things up I
mean they can only last so long they
don't move fast like how are they
surviving they're just kind of like
shuffling towards you I feel like if you
just have a big sword you can just start
hacking away yeah so there are zombies
cells in the body and I that segue
because people are gonna say why the
hell aren't we talking about aging no we
will okay we're here forever
max Brooks the son of Mel Brooks aha
there you go
shout-out to Max Brooks and Mel Brooks
sorry aging well we don't have to zombie
cells yeah so what are they
I'll be done talking about Africa and
your trip oh sure cuz it's pretty
exciting
uh well it's your show too thank you
when you're on it you're a pisode uh
well somebody else
I reckon everybody go to Africa not just
to come back a different person a better
human being but also to support them
they really need our help over there
when you were in the area where the
oldest human like fossils were found
what's the feeling like when you're in
this area like you you really are where
the origins of humankind are from I mean
there's got to be a pretty profound
feeling yeah it was spiritual
unfortunately that the people who drove
us they were saying hurry hurry you have
to go see some zebras this is more
important than the zebras but these are
the people that are the guides yeah yeah
they don't know what was important to us
fair enough but I would have loved to
have spent whole day there they
apparently there are still fossils
sticking out of the walls of the core
really yeah so the reason that it's a
view allowed to do anything with them I
don't know what happens if you find a
fossil yes it can University and you
just like shut the fuck up
well actually I I probably shouldn't
confess this on don't live me don't do
it bro tell me later it's not so bad
okay you can actually find a whole bunch
of stuff in Africa that's interesting if
you look down rather than out and my
oldest daughter our oldest daughter Alex
she looked out she's a scientist and so
she 16 year old scientist she found a
whole bunch of stone tools whoa not
there not not in Olduvai Gorge that
sacred but you know just out on the
Serengeti or wherever did you get them
analyzed not yet they've recently found
stone tools in the United States that
they've brought back to 16,000 years ago
the oldest known stone tools of any
human being and it's sort of there
they're slowly but surely pushing back
the dates of human civilization in
America and one of the more recent
discoveries with stone tools that are
from 16,000 years ago so people had made
their way over here or here it is about
this yeah so you never saw it I don't
know if you saw it yet they said it
there's I don't know if they have video
of it but they said they saw this monkey
sharpening that stone before it was
actually breaking the glass with it
glass was sharpened stone impressive
Prison Break attempt man fuck keeping
monkeys in a cage that drives me so
crazy I I hate it I went I took a pot
edible once but a real
wrong one and I went to the zoo it was
so depressing staring at the chimps I've
sat across and watched the chimp caged
I'm like oh my god these things are in
hell yeah they just imprison even
keeping little birds in cage okay just
like this yeah but the monkeys are
waiting for us right there wailing Wow
they had some some type of monkey it was
in a smaller cage than the chimps and
was just wailing Wow just in hell yeah
it is
it's brutal actually that the the stone
tools are interesting because again
getting to what's natural what's natural
for primates is to change their
environment to take tools too yes so
what we did what we're doing
genetic genetic engineering well I want
say engineering but we're using
genetically just and why we are the
agent why we don't have to it is natural
of course that's what we do all of even
all of science is natural you could even
argue that an iPhone in your pocket is
natural sure
humans have created it they exist all
over the world right I've argued that
the cities are natural it's a completely
normal thing for humans to do to create
cities to say that cities are unnatural
well why are they everywhere and why are
human beings mango I st. beehives are
unnatural to write clothes yeah
unnatural
well animal habitat I mean animals like
beavers create beaver dens and they're
they're very uniform they're real
similar everywhere they go
exactly yeah yeah the other day someone
said humans tamed fire 500,000 years ago
and I said that can't be true 500,000
years ago that's not too long ago I
checked it out it's true and these
weren't even humans these or pre human I
think it was probably one of the two
species back we've been doing this we
didn't change the environment using
tools using fire for that long the fire
when it's crazy right because it's not
just manipulating a physical thing it's
changing the state right you're you're
doing something whether it's with flint
and stun you know some something to
spark and some tinder you're really
creating changing the state of matter
well we are and will continue to do that
will continue to evolve and one of the
that the reasons that I wanted to see
human origins is in my book I talked
about we've evolved to our natural
lifespan we're now at a maximum 122 is
the longest lived human that ostensibly
is on record
the so without intervention we've
reached our maximum but why not now give
us what evolution failed to give us why
can't we be like other species that are
at the top of their game are there any
factors when you look at the oldest
people that are alive are there any
common factors actually not really that
they do seem to have a collection of
gene variants that predispose them to
get to that long there's one called Fox
o3 that if you've done your genome we
can ever look 23andme they've done it
I have we should look at it I just tell
you you need an A or a T at a certain
position I've got one of them out of two
my kids got two of my kids out of three
have both so they if they look after
themselves might have a better chance of
living longer but anyway these long live
people they tend to live a long time no
matter what they do often they smoke
till ninety years old really yeah
they quit at ninety there's a few cases
of that and they live another 12 years
right right for 22 years right you said
122 years old that's one one lady in
France but one of my friends here's his
name is Nero Barzilai he was with me in
Israel he's got a story of when he asked
the centenarian lady lady that lived
over 100 that he knew why didn't you
quit smoking and she said oh oh four
doctors I went to told me to quit
smoking and they've all died so I go
that's hilarious
what did she do for a living John
Coleman I forget the French lady I don't
remember what she did I would imagine
that would play a part
like how stressful your occupation is
and yes she had a great sense of humor
that was probably part of it I used to
make jokes with her reporters all the
time one was a how many wrinkles do you
have she says I've only got one and I'm
sitting on it big the the other one I
think is even better as a reporter who
was young said you know you're 116 I
hope I see you next year for your
birthday she says I don't see why not
you seem pretty healthy to me Wow and
she made it to 122 now if there been any
anecdotal reports of
that live longer well Methuselah and
biblically know yeah but not biblical
like no I not unsubstantiated reports
because I had heard of there's some
people that claim to have lived like
ridiculously long but they've never
really figured out whether or not it's
accurate sure there's there's a few of
those but even even Jon comment at 2122
there's a big argument now between us
researchers whether that's even true oh
really yeah it's a massive debate I've
got an inbox full of long angry emails
from scientists what's the evidence
point to the contrary that - so the the
hypothesis is that she her identity was
subsumed by her daughter to avoid paying
taxes and there's photos of them and
there's a blotch on one photo that
matches the daughter so there's a lot of
forensics going on and people want to
subdue the grave and the French
government's not or French researchers
aren't giving up the blood samples they
don't they don't want to know so it's
probably horseshit well probably like a
hundred years it could it could be
bullshit I would say it doesn't actually
matter
goddamn French it doesn't matter people
have lived 117 and that's still pretty
good that's what we know you know if
it's in the Rican Oliver live that long
who's gonna complain wouldn't you like
to get one of them old old old old old
people and start doing work on them yeah
just pump him up with nad get him on a
drip well my dad's remaining on himself
so he's not even hundred yet but he's 80
how's he look well I wouldn't say he
looked young but his fitness is like a
thirty year old and really he's stronger
than me we tested out in the gym the
other no way that's embarrassing he can
lift more he's fitter we're going across
the Serengeti and he was leading the
charge if you saw him if you didn't see
his face cuz he's got grey hair and
whatever physically he put a bag on his
head
you just you'd say his thirty the way he
moves people vary where to put a bag in
your dad's head yeah I shouldn't do that
sorry dad but you think he's thirty
really well he's he's reinvigorated in
life so you know in my family we've got
some Ashkenazi bad genes we tend to die
young and my grandmother died my
grandmother is actually only 15 years
older than my dad and she died a few
years ago last 10 years of her life
horrible
so we know what's gonna happen in my
family probably to all of us so your mom
your grandmother had your father when
she was fifteen years old right whoa
yeah back in the early days of World War
two she apparently was playing around
with her boyfriend she claims to be a
virgin but at that point what something
got somewhere that shouldn't have
and she suppose during high school right
so I was raised by my grandmother she
was in her 40s when I was a kid and she
was the one that taught me to always
stay young keep your you know adults
ruin everything that's probably why I
work on aging adults ruin everything
well how was her advice like in terms of
like why how do you avoid what adults
are doing wrong well you know she she'd
grown up during the Depression and then
World War two and then the Communists
came into Hungary and raped it a lot of
people she had no she had had no respect
for Humanity so by the time I came along
first of all she put all of our energy
into to me and I'm I was a spot bride as
a kid so that that was wasn't helpful to
me I think now as an adult but more
importantly she wanted me to do the best
I could with my life she said David do
what you can to make this world a better
place make sure that you leave this
place better than you found it and
that's what I'm trying to do wow what a
pro founded piece of advice for a
grandchild she was a rebel she taught me
forget the rules right kind of like you
do I'm going my own way and we'll see
how this goes she so she went to
Australia she said fuck Europe I'm outta
here she went to Australia the furthest
place she could find from Europe never
went back she went on Bondi Beach in
Sydney in a bikini which was rebellious
notice she got taken off the beach pipe
by the police would you have to wear
back then are the full little British
thing deep dandy nice what it down to
your knees I think so did they look like
maybe it was a full one-piece but hard
to show your belly that's what I think
but she was a rebel she went to New
Guinea by herself in the 60s what year
was this where she was wearing a bikini
that would be
t6u couldn't wear a bikini in the 50s
Wow
well okay like those pinup girls right
when you see them they always had
one-piece suits on like a yeah so
imagine you Guinea in the 60s as a woman
on a run up in the highlands she claims
to have eaten human flesh and she spent
most of the time drunk as well did you
see that article that was yesterday
where they were interviewing an
Australian a guy who was a doctor or
scientist who's talking about climate
change and he was saying that we have to
start eating human bodies and that human
bodies are very nutritious and that we
just put them in the ground and it I was
reading it I was like okay it's this guy
trolling like what is what is he doing
here is he a completely insane person
but his advice was our dependence on
meat is ruining like in some places
where they're you know they're stripping
the rainforests to make room for cattle
grazing he was saying that we are
getting rid of perfectly good meat every
time we put someone in the ground well
we are but but to suggest that it sounds
insane to me yeah because it was we
throw away half our food anyway at least
in this country it was a mainstream
publication but this guy was talking
much like the last thing you want to
encourage is people getting used to
eating people he's been watching World
War Z maybe yeah I mean it's just one of
those like come on I was I was going is
this guy just trying to get attention
like this seems like such a or is it did
he was he joking and it's hard to tell
in text you know yeah well yeah not
every Australian is sensible
I'm the article but I don't see anything
about him saying wasting human body is
there meat there's been of more than
several articles written on it maybe
someone extrapolated but the idea was he
was saying that people should eat meat
and if they want to eat meat they should
eat human because well maybe waste
animal rights activists might be just an
idiot ate your relatives yeah yeah but
just last thing you want is people
getting the taste of people you know
right no do not need to go that far
not yet speaking of the food supply one
of the things people worry about if we
all live longer is we're gonna run out
of food and run out of space yeah and
one of the things I address in the book
is what really will happen if you do the
calculations if you look at human
history that is not going to happen
I'm of the strong belief that we can
engineer our way out of just about any
problem probably the only thing we can't
engineer our way out of is if we get hit
by a five-mile wide Meteor right but
everything else I think we're gonna be
you think climate change we're gonna be
able to engineer our way out
well I don't that we can stop climate
change at this point it's definitely
happening
you can see it all around but will it
wipe us out no it will it cost us
trillions of dollars yeah and so I I
don't think it's gonna be the end of us
but it's going to be a challenge to to
continue to survive and and proliferate
as a species in the face of all of those
costly things and that's the biggest
problem of climate change
besides species losses the expense in
Europe there's only certain amount of
human capital that we have to spend and
we call that money and that's one of the
reasons that I'm excited about extending
people's health and lifespan is that
that'll save tens of trillions in the
club each year and that's money that can
be put to combating global warming
saving species
besides you know wonderful people who
donate their their earnings as well but
really to solve the big problems in on
the planet one of them is to solve what
we can do with all the frail elderly
people that are coming run every year
more and more make them productive like
my father he could be in a nursing home
like his mother was whereas now he's
hiking in the jungles looking at
watching gorillas with these five
grandkids how cool is that that's pretty
cool no what kind of protocols here are
pretty much the same as me although he
does more exercise so it's a combination
of nmn metformin and resveratrol and
what kind of exercise I'm not sure if
he's protocol we're going to post that
on on social media once we're sure Eden
but I know it involves a fair amount of
aerobic exercise he does rowing and and
walking up stairs so he managed to climb
I think it was 40 stairs in 1540 flights
of stairs in 15 minutes which for an 80
year old was was quite a 40 flights of
stairs and 15 minutes holy shit yeah the
guy's a phenomenon what what has
happened though is that his outlook on
life has changed he was depressed not
not just because he was fearful of
getting old and my mother was sick at
the time but now he's looking forward to
another 10 years of vigorous life
traveling and it you know when you're
healthy you're happy so when he was
depressed was he sedentary no no he was
depressed because he was worried about
his health he figured he's gonna be like
all these other friends getting frail
can't can't walk losing your mind and it
hasn't happened to him so he just a few
years ago he went back and started a new
career whoa oh we talked about this last
time I believe what what's his new
career again he's on a committee that
evaluates clinical trials for ethics Wow
which is what you want older people to
do use their wisdom and knowledge to
excited about something as well right
something that stimulates you and keeps
you going and gives you something to be
interested in and talk about wasting
human flesh what a waste it is for
someone with that knowledge to die
prematurely right that's the more
interesting thing to me about longevity
is look I'm so much wiser at 52 than I
was at 42
I just am I make less mistakes I'm more
aware just across the board and I'm
wiser at 42 than it was at 32 and at 22
I was basically a chimp so it's like as
time goes on you understand how you're
interfacing with the world you you
communicate with people better you know
how to get by you know what you have to
do and what the consequences are of not
doing what you have to do in terms of
being disciplined and being healthy and
just meditation and making sure you you
you understand the consequences also of
not doing the work
that you're supposed to do in terms of
like the way you feel about yourself
your self-respect and the way you just
feel about like your sense of
self-satisfaction it's it to me takes a
big hit when I'm lazy takes a big hit
when I don't get things done and I don't
expect everybody to do the same things
that I do or have the same sort of work
ethic or didn't uh need now I don't say
work ethics that implies like some sort
of superiority it's more of just the
idea of what you want to accomplish like
your tasks everyone has their own idea
of what but if you enjoy doing something
and you're working toward something I
feel like there's more purpose to life
you have more satisfaction in
accomplishing tasks and that's one of
the things that's been highlighted when
you read books on happiness and studies
on happiness one of the things it seems
to be most important is goal setting
goal setting working towards those goals
and achieving progress that these are
critical components to happiness for
human beings and without them with is
this aimless sort of drifting of life
people for the most part obviously
everyone's different but for the most
part people don't find satisfaction and
just an aimless sort of drifting
existence yeah 100% I'm I just turned
fifty while I was over in Africa oh just
before that you know imagine being 80
and healthy that like my dad ninety or
hundred yes of course I'm so less
stressed than I was in my 20s and 30s
and anyone who's listening who's in
their 20s and thinks that they're you
know way better than a 50 year old I can
tell you from experience like you Joe
when I was in my 20s I thought I knew
everything or at least I I looked at
myself as as a fifty year old and I
thought what an old fart yes yeah it's
not like that at all especially with
today's you know health and you know 50
or older just like they were like a 30
year old was you know 52 year olds like
me when I was 20 they didn't exist maybe
Jack LaLanne right well that it's be
talked about a thing was in The New
Yorker that this movie cocoon I don't
know if everyone's seen it but it's a
it's a pretty interesting movie where
these 50 60 or
were given the Fountain of Youth and
they still look old but it was really
supposed to be quite funny to see these
older people with gray hair jumping in
the pool and acting 30 years old but a
50 year old isn't old anymore
50 year olds just getting going yeah
that's crazy about it you know I mean if
you see old movie stars from like the
1960s when they were like 50 they looked
like they were dead men you know like we
were we were looking at I forget what
the movie was but it was a movie where I
was like how old was he when they made
that movie and turned out he was 44 I'm
like that guy looks a hundred years old
looks like he's never worked out he
probably smoked cigarettes all day long
never exercises never it drinks
constantly this looks like a dead man
it's crazy right so in the future 90
will 90 will feel like 50 info well we
were talking about Laird earlier and
Laird I think is 55 years old and just
as fucking fit as a human being can be
and he's doing crazy shit where he's
he's got this whole exercise routine
that he does inside the pool where he
brings like 70 pound dumbbells and he
carries it with one arm and swims across
the pool and the other you know he does
two-handed dumbbell things the bottom of
the pool and leaps this surface catches
a breath of air drops back down to the
bottom again leaps the surface why is
carrying these dumbbells I mean just
ruthless rigorous exercise at 55 years
old well there'll be a time when you
can't really tell how old somebody is
especially when we figure out how to
reprogram the body to be young again
yeah and it's gonna be such such a great
world when people with 80 years of
experience can continue to run companies
and be teachers and educate the young
people now that there's a bias though
against the elderly we've always had
this in society and we have to overcome
that my dentist was biased against me as
a 50 didn't want to fix your teeth
you're dead bro I'm not fixed no way the
money screw it I'll pay for it just do
it so it says a 20 minute argument do it
do 20 minutes it was a lot in fact the
time ran out and she said fine I'll do
one tooth just to check because she was
had all these reasons why she shouldn't
do it'll break off I have to polish back
your original teeth and I said look I'm
not gonna get angry if it doesn't work
just just try it and she did it
first of all she said I have to eat crow
after it and then my wife came a week
later and she said man your husband's a
pain in the ass but he's on to something
and actually she's offering this as a
service now to people our age yeah she's
trying to make money I guess it hasn't
cracked off and I'm pretty happy with
teeth if it does fix it again right why
not yeah that's everything and we should
do live yeah but here's the problem with
with some aspects of medicine when we're
young we don't get the medicines that
will prevent us getting sick when we're
old yeah so drugs like metformin you're
not gonna give to a twenty thirty year
old right but when you get old you don't
get the medicines that they give the
young then everyone should be treated
equally in my view as long as we know
it's safe for sure
oh you know there's the cost but some of
these treatments like metformin that's
probably less than a dollar a day a cup
of coffee and might extend your lifespan
where you got a cup of coffee for a buck
I get free coffee from here haven't
Laird Hamilton super food machine like
coffees even more expensive than that
yeah it's some the the limited idea of
what you should or shouldn't do to fix
people as they get older my friend God
is ACL torn and he's 60 and they said
his doctor recommended he just rehab it
and don't get it fixed what the fuck are
you talking about get it fixed man you
want to have a bum knee that just
buckles on you all the time go get it
fixed
six months later it'd be done like
you'll go through the rehab otherwise
six months later you still have a shitty
knee it's like your your call man but I
just get it fixed bite the bullet go fix
it right but his doctor was like where
come on Bruce come on Bruce let's be
honest we're we're at the end of the
movie know what 20 anymore
yeah yeah that's that limited tank
limited thinking is so frustrating to me
yeah I first encountered this when I was
29 actually I reckon you at 29 it's a
wrap they well they were I don't know
actually
this is the problem with the other end
of the spectrum which is I was too young
to get a medicine that could help me
when I get older oh wow was cholesterol
medicine the statins and my doctor said
why do you want to get on this drug I
know you've got high cholesterol but
you're only 29 and come on
and I said look why wait till I get the
disease
to treat it but you know now people use
statins more but in those days and
statins very controversial though they
are they apparently have a huge health
hit well I haven't noticed and I've high
cholesterol and I think it's worth it
but yeah if there's nothing else wrong
with you you wouldn't take them but do
you have arterial plaque no not yet I'm
perfectly clean right but shouldn't
isn't but isn't there some there's
there's doctors that are arguing that
the idea of high cholesterol the higher
its LDL HDL with it's good cholesterol
bad cholesterol that's like this sort of
uniform approach people with high
cholesterol need to take something that
lowers their cholesterol and you know
doctors that I've talked to are saying
well not necessarily at all it you could
be incredibly healthy especially if
you're not sedentary with with
relatively high cholesterol if
everything balances itself out if you
have the appropriate ratio of HDL to LDL
right do you have the appropriate ratio
or is it out of whack now I do but when
I was 29 I was off the charts right I
had a blood that looked more like cream
and that's where one of the things
apparently where dietary cholesterol
does make a hit it does have an effect
on people with genetic predisposition to
high cholesterol in certain ways right
is that correct right yeah right but
changing my diet had a big impact as
well what did you do to different that
was different I went more well I ate
less I lost weight that helped do you do
intermittent fasting yeah as much as I
can
one of the other guys that was on this
tour of Israel with me is Valter Longo
and he's the arguably the world's expert
on this what a great name isn't it he's
an Italian guy Walter lungo Longo yeah
like the coffee guy Colin when you got a
real problem yeah yeah well he's uh he's
written a book and he is the probably
world's expert in human periodic fasting
his but everyone who wants to know about
what the best periodic fasting protocol
is there isn't one we don't know yet
we're right on the cusp there haven't
been enough studies but there are a few
types I go through them in my book so
because oh we won't have time to go
through all of it but there's the what
is it the 18 18 hours yeah is it going
if you can go skip breakfast have a late
lunch that's a good start
that's what I try to do every day it's
not always possible like when you're in
Africa and they're feeding you massive
meals three times a day but the that's
what you wanted to be hungry for part of
the day or you can go a little more
extreme and skip two days and what's
that what's the benefit of being hungry
great question and this is what my lab
and others figured out in a year - you
know first few years of the 21st century
we figured out that these genes that
extend lifespan these sirtuin genes are
activated by being hungry in part by
raising nad levels which you we any men
will mimic the effect of so being hungry
actually raises your lifespan in some
sort of way right so caloric restriction
is what we used to talk about a lot if
you restrict the calories of a rat
wasn't actually discovered back in the
early 20th century we'll make them live
up to 30% longer not in an old state but
it prevents them getting old so the rats
don't get cancer heart disease and all
of these other good things and that was
the only thing that we knew up until
about twenty years ago even ten probably
and so we used to think you I'd be had
to be hungry all the time and there was
a still is a society called the calorie
restriction Society and they were hungry
all the time that very small meals which
is pretty tough I tried that and gave up
after a week but this new paradigm is
that you don't have to always be hungry
similar to you don't always have to be
on a treadmill you can do it for a short
time make it intense and then you can
let your body recover and go back to a
normal life for a little bit and that's
great news that means that we can have
the L cake and eat it too so to speak as
long as the cake doesn't have a lot of
sugar in it now when you are on this
protocol of restricted eating plus
metformin when do you take what and when
do you exercise and how do you balance
it out like what when do you know what
to do what oh I use my body as a guide
you know now that I'm fifty I have a
pretty good like you you know
you know how your body feels and reacts
I'm also measuring it a ring that that
matches my pulse in my sleep is that the
aura yeah yeah I spelled that a oh you
oh you are a yep that isn't Kevin Rose a
part of that company is that is that it
yeah Jamie says yeah okay from dig you
know dig calm you don't know dig no how
dare you sorry
it's a good place to go find cool shit
okay okay dig calm shout out to dig yeah
I go there every day because real
interesting stories on the Internet
you're always finding cool weird videos
and just fascinating science stories
human nature human interest stories
sounds good
I have a watch what kind of watch you're
using the Apple watch okay how does that
measure by the way they just really set
up a watch five today Oh apparently it's
better you might want to get it was it
do what is though Apple watch - yeah
how's it well I change your songs and in
my head tells the time occasionally but
yeah what's useful with it is a pulse
and activity mm-hm and if I haven't
moved enough during the day I've got a
standing desk and that's been helpful to
make move around a little bit more but
mainly it's a no seduce occasional blood
test to make sure that my body's
optimized as best I can
personalized and usually all those
measures you read the data off your
watch like how do you read it what what
application are you using nothing
special just on my phone have a look
okay so you just have a look like what
your resting heart rate is how much
activity how far you're walking how many
calories you're burning that kind of
deal yeah yeah pretty simple and I'm
happy to say my resting heart rates
really low which means you know things
are going okay so far for me even though
I don't do enough exercise as you
rightly point out I think my resting
heart rates 46 that's very good it's
pretty amazing for a guy that barely
does exercise yeah you must have good
genetics well obviously do your dad's in
phenomenal shape at 80 ah no we have
terrible genetics oh well how's he in
such great shape at 80 well we don't
know but but it could be that he's been
exercising and he's
also been on this paradigm so one of the
the effects in mice at least of an MN
which is what we're taking is improved
blood flow you get the benefits of
exercise without having to exercise yeah
if your mouse and those mice they're
running on a treadmill for 50% further
because the blood flow and the lactate
was reduced really so maybe that's
happening that's incredible
now what is the difference between the
effects of nmn and IV nad which is very
popular there's people that take IV nad
and I've never done it but we've talked
about doing it many times and having it
brought in here and sometimes people do
it and they do it very quickly well you
do it it only takes 10 minutes but it
hurts like hell apparently it gives you
like stomach knots and you feel terrible
right all right it's not done it I
haven't admitted publicly that I've done
it do it but I but I try everything once
love that microphone I try everything
once yeah and so last time I was out
here in LA I gave it a gave it a shot so
to speak yeah how was it uh it was fine
it was fine now let's get to the science
in a minute but what I found was so was
a shot in the butt with Heidi so why
didn't they do it intravenously I
thought that was the move they did
intramuscularly right right this doctor
is experimenting oh yeah it was it was a
friend of a friend so I had a there I
got an idea came here yeah but here's
the thing it felt I had tingles in my
legs I felt a little different for a few
minutes maybe 10 minutes and they don't
went away hmm
but the science we don't know yet we're
still trying to figure out if that
actually works or not so instead I'm
taking the molecule that we've studied
in my lab which has taken as a pill now
there are a lot of people that swear by
the IV version of nad and when they do
it intravenously apparently you feel
phenomenal and there's quite a few
people I know my friend Kyle Kingsburg
has done it several times and he's very
big on the latest and the greatest of
health crazes well I know it's being
used widely especially down in Florida
to treat it
action nad interesting IV and I get
emails all the time which is best but
you know I'm a scientist I'm at Harvard
Medical School so I have to always be
based on facts and the fact is we don't
know if it works yet right anecdotes are
anecdotes my father's story it's not a
clinical trial right we need to do more
but what's interesting about this field
is that because people have access to
information through podcasts like yours
and through the internet now that papers
you can go to what's called PubMed
Central and find papers people are
educating themselves just like
scientists used to and they can go to
the doctor or go to the Internet and try
experiments on themselves now I don't
condone that I can't I'm a researcher
not a doctor but I find it really
interesting that were in a new phase of
society where people can learn more in
many cases than the doctors actually not
sure in particular when it comes to
nutrition because that's one of the
things that I found it's shocking when
you talk to some doctors and you talked
to them about nutrition particularly
supplementation and they'll say things
like well you can get everything from a
good diet Mike can you really can you
really like how much time did you spend
school motherfucker like how much time
did you study nutrition this is nonsense
talk you can get everything from a good
die what's your good diet tell me what a
good diet is what are you getting from
that good diet how you getting that
vitamin b12 and high doses what do you
get where are you getting your C where
are you getting your d3 what are you
what are you getting huh what are you
getting your essential fatty acids
what's the what's a optimal level of
essential fatty acids and they don't
have a fucking clue they're talking
about you know they don't they there's
so many doctors that go through their
entire medical you know in fourth
exogenous or what have you
they go through their entire medical
school with like maybe four or five
hours of nutrition research right I have
to be careful what I say I work at the
medical school but I do love doctors
don't get me wrong all right we need
them but we we're not going to do
surgery on ourselves right that said
some doctors will listen to their
patients and do research those are the
great doctors that actually stay on top
of things but it's really hard right
they're already working 12 14 hours a
day
so let's you're fair to doctors plus
they have to work within the insurance
system I understand that there was their
only problem that I have is when they
say things like you get everything you
need
with a good dog you remember our three
square meals a day yeah bullshit make
sure you follow the food pyramid and eat
a lot of grain right right remember that
well and don't eat eggs don't drink milk
awareness yeah eight margarine yeah
hilarious what milk is a sketchy thing
yeah quite honestly because you're
drinking this dead liquid it's been
homogenized pasteurized and I find my
body reacts very differently to raw milk
than it does to milk that has been
processed
well you I wonder if anyone studied the
microbiome that might be helpful to but
just makes sense that it's got all the
enzymes in it it's all that's how the
human being or a body any any animals
supposed to naturally process that milk
yeah I guess it's mostly sterile yeah
but yeah I use whole milk in my day it's
surprising right because I'm I'm trying
to avoid calories but the benefits in a
taste and how I feel that yogurt I make
myself out of whole milk that you make
yogurt yeah what are you a wild man why
don't you buy it you're so short on time
what are you doing making be making your
own butter - you got one them Turner's
yeah well you know we all have our
hobbies one of my hobbies no he's the
problem I got so hooked on this type of
yogurt which I first made for my son
trying to help him he has a weight and
eating issue I was thinking that would
help him but I got addicted to the
yogurt and so is everyone in my family
now so if I don't make the yogurt
they're like dad where's the yogurt oh
no kid and so how do you do it oh it's
really easy that you get packets there's
three different packets you rip em open
put them in whole milk shake it and
stick it in the the oven on defrost for
24 hours really on the in the oven so
what is defrost like what temperature's
out of 35 Celsius
whatever that is a 91 Zen 90 95 so
you're using like a Dutch oven or
something like that that's regular ah
yeah
I mean but I mean in terms of the pan
that you put Oh what you mean what's the
bottle yes that's just a large mason jar
okay and just heating it up with the
probiotics inside of it your bacteria
inside it it just starts to coalesce
yeah and I
affected the first few ones were were
not great but now it works every time
and actually the protocol on the
internet said you have to boil it
measure the temperature to get it all
right sterilize it and I just pour it
straight in shake it stick it in it's
fine
really yeah so far huh did you ever get
it analyzed no you're a scientist you
want to send it a little cup of it to
somebody go hey man take a look at this
hey what are you worried about I don't
know I'm not worried area I'm not
worried at all I'm just curious as to
whether like how potent it is you know
there's various levels of you know
acidophilus that you're getting from
from yogurt yeah I researched it before
I started and this is a company that
makes a yogurt that it that matches a
healthy microbiome mmm nearly what I'm
aware of that's great
and you use whole milk you don't use raw
milk right but I didn't have good access
to raw milk where'd he get it like Oh
health food store like sprouts or you
know something like that
yeah I think they have it at erawan
maybe Whole Foods has it it's a it's
really tricky because you it's not even
legal in some places to have whole milk
in fact people been arrested and and
just locked up for having whole milk yes
Google that because it's pretty
preposterous when you think about how
easy it is to buy whiskey right and then
think about people buying whole milk
that whole milk is apparently for some
people I mean it might have just
something to do with skirting FDA
regulations and yeah things along those
lines it gets very complicated for sure
and then those are the reason for
homogenous ation and pasteurization is
obviously health right we're trying to
protect people in also its shelf-life it
stays on the Shelf longer mm-hmm but
I've definitely bought it yeah there's a
small what does it call it a small group
food group raw food club they had they
were raided in 2011 mm-hmm for sharing
raw milk or something the latest raw
milk raid an attack on food freedom
federal agents organized a sting
operation against a tiny raw milk buying
Club and ignore more serious food safety
concerns
yeah like Twinkies I mean how hard is it
look you can i'm sure get food poisoning
from spoiled milk right but isn't
spoiled milk yogurt ultimately right
well here's what i do with food if it
stinks i don't eat it good move bro yeah
i think milk you smell pretty quickly if
it's going bad this involved unwashed
room-temperature eggs the other count
unwashed room-temperature eggs a storage
method Rossum members prefer by the way
when we had chickens for these nasty
coyotes killed all my chickens we would
store our eggs at room temperature we
put him in a bowl we would wash the
outside of the egg and put him in a bowl
and they would sit on the counter and I
was eating them all day long
nothing happened healthiest fuck agents
dumped gallons of raw milk and filled a
large flat bed with the seized food
including coconuts we seized your
fucking coconuts watermelons and frozen
buffalo meat what the fuck like what is
this agents who are these assholes that
are getting paid government money from
our taxes to steal frozen frozen meat
jesus christ christopher darden who
helped prosecute oj simpson appeared at
Stuart's arraignment just in time to
lower his bail
alright so Christopher Gardens out there
helping people whatever gross just to
grow I mean I don't think you should you
know we should somehow or another find
out whether there's a way to test if
this raw milk is fresh enough for people
to eat but if it is people live on farms
have been drinking raw milk since the
beginning of time it's normal and
healthy it tastes better it's it's way
easier for you to digest like I get a
little weird when I drink like straight
like if I have milk and cookies which I
love um I don't know what me it's a
cookie so milk hmm I might be full of
shit here now I'm thinking about it the
cookies might be what's messing with my
stomach
I don't think so though cuz you get this
feeling from the milk like the bull
it's probably both another thing about
it's both well in France you get the the
unpasteurized cheese yes my friend
jean-marc used to bring it back in his
luggage he would smuggle back for a rock
lot you know what that is yeah it's like
a dish that he would make with meat and
cheese yeah that's good but I don't hear
the French dying in droves they seem to
be healthy as fuck and then I was fat
right yeah their bread is better they
have bread that is not from their there
they don't have modern wheat so the
wheat that they have is not engineered
to have more complex glutens and and
higher yield like we do so we don't
vibrate in my family my wife makes it oh
nice yeah
and so weird oh yeah a lot of sourdough
the yeast is even wild she got that from
Belgium a friend of ours hunger hung
some semi is what is it some some stuff
in a tree collected the yeast brought it
back to the US and really shared it with
us caught it like caught some yeast well
he put some dough wet dough up in a tree
and left it there for a few days and
caught this wild yeast up in there well
Jim forest or apparently it only occurs
he he claims but we have the best bread
at home it's crunchy you know you
thought you break it open I mean I'm
trying to avoid carbs and this is the
hardest thing when you get home and the
breads just come out of the oven
and why are you avoiding carbs ah well
I'm trying to keep my blood glucose
levels steady not spiked too much that's
pretty clear that that's not healthy and
just eating a bunch of braids will be a
good way to spike that one of the things
that I've heard about the French and the
Italians in general is that they eat
their bread with either butter or olive
oil and that these healthy fats that
you're getting along with the bread is
one of the reasons why it doesn't have
the same sort of health hit and then
just the complex glutens you know the
the engineered week that we have it when
you eat pasta in Italy it has a
different effect on your body just feels
different yeah exactly
so there are number of people that I
know maybe people you know to who are
putting
glucose monitors on their arm here
mm-hmm to see what foods they react to
Radha Patrick's been doing this for a
while and actually I asked her what what
about what's the worst food you've seen
in your body to spike glucose she said
grapes avoid grapes really yeah avoid
Gramps yeah I wish I had an Alistar that
so now more counterintuitive right you
think you're eating healthy when you
have me some fruit as I said what was
the biggest surprise she said potatoes
on so bad well there's a thing that you
could do with potatoes right where you
boil them and then cool them off and
then reheat them and apparently has a
profound effect on the way it impacts
your blood sugar levels that it's far
healthier when you there's some sort of
process see if you could find out what
that process was who explained that to
us do you remember was it Rhonda
probably was 99% of my nutrition
knowledge I get from Rhonda Packer
Patrick but I believe it's something to
do with the way the potato reacts to
being boiled and then chilled and then
reheated again there's something about
it so the starches are less yeah a label
somehow somehow and it has a much more
healthy effect on your blood glucose
levels and doesn't spike you in the way
that just a straight-up baked potato
would this would be coming from Chris
crecer aha even that's the other 1% of
my nutrition knowledge it's probably not
even spry like 60/40 potatoes for gut
health and weight loss the potato hack
says the potato intervention of the
short-term tool to check the reactivity
of the gut to resistant starch reset the
hedonic system create metabolic
flexibility resolve inflammatory
conditions and provide the patient with
an empowerment tool to increase the fat
loss of their dietary plan it's not
meant as a standalone diet but rather a
dietary tool to decrease hunger
blah-blah-blah-blah-blah scroll up there
so we could find out what the fuck the
potato hack is explanation poor potato
has been maligned did
here's an explanation functional
medicine Chris crasher on the Joe Rogan
show ha right here that scroll up magic
of this plan release its clinical effect
efficacy is the amount of resistant
starch resistant starch as a type of
starts that is indigestible to us but
feeds our microbiome on a potato is
heated and then cooled a significant
amount of its starch is retrograded into
resistant starch this means that the
effect on blood sugar is greatly
dampened the potato can be even be
reheated and it will still retain its
resistant starch content the nourishment
to our gut biome and the subsequent
metabolic benefits cannot be overstated
I've seen this be crucial in some
patients who have stalled on a low carb
or keto eating plan but still have
significant body fat left to lose
historically resistant starch would have
been present in most roots tubers unripe
bananas plantains etc but is often
devoid in our current diets mm-hmm Chris
crasher in the house yeah well you go so
what when I was in Africa you reminded
me they eat a lot of blueberries and so
these colored foods are also good to eat
so resveratrol comes on when yams dark
things right well yeah
leafy visuals but also fruits that are
very colored colorful so why why is that
why is a well I'm glad you asked the so
we have this idea called Xena or
hormesis and that's a terrible name for
something that's quite simple and that
is that these molecules from plants are
produced to make the plants healthier
these are stress response chemicals and
with your stress plants they turn
colored turn on a UV lamp or put a plant
in a Sun it'll turn reddish you know
mm-hmm those are stressful chemicals to
survive and I believe that we've evolved
to sense those chemicals in our food
supply
oh so we're attracted to juicy red
tomatoes or as opposed to pale Tomatoes
well not just a flavor to it
I think we're attracted to it because
they're colorful but what our bodies get
out of it is that these chemicals go
into our bloodstream and they turn on
our
defenses against disease and to survive
why is that good why did that evolve or
potentially evolve it's I think because
when our food supply was stressed we
need to get ready for adversity because
we probably run out of food and if
you're a bird or some other dumb animal
dumb or animal or even a yeast cell how
you gonna know if your food supply is
gonna run out you've got it know it
chemically
so these chemicals are our heads up that
adversity is coming so if you eat a lot
of these chemicals through say red wine
which is stressed grapes and other
things like that blueberries these
chemicals they're not probably not
working mainly through antioxidant
activity they're giving us this stress
heads-up isn't there there's that's a
controversial thing the red wine thing
correct like whether or not red wine the
the actual compound of resveratrol is
where we're getting our benefit from
because it's apparently a very small
amount of resveratrol and what red wine
yeah sure it's not really controversial
except when people exaggerate and say
that it's all resveratrol resveratrol is
a component of dozens of healthy
molecules in red wine quercetin which is
good for a number of things there's a
whole bunch of polyphenols they called
and so resveratrol is part of that
cocktail was a fermentation process
because we're talking about grapes
themselves with the high sugar content
actually being something we should avoid
right so don't eat the grapes but but
wine if you don't have too much of it
will have a concentrated amount of these
xeno hermetic molecules like resveratrol
and corseted is this a parent in red
wine it's really only in red wine white
wines just for chicks right not as
healthy actually looks right that's a
joke for my friend bud yeah you'll get
in trouble everyone no it's just for my
friend bud
he loves white wine I'm like that's for
chicks bro I'm joking folks just jokes
don't get it touchy
yeah so you don't need to so that when
we treated mice with resveratrol they
were immune to the effect of high-fat
diet
Western diet and we've traced this down
to a single genetic pathway that we work
on these sirtuins I talked about these
nad
responsive pathways really so they were
immune to eating shitty food like the
negative aspects of eating shitty food
yeah that this was 2003 that's why it
hit all the newspapers because it was
the first molecule that was safe and
could mimic the effects of fasting or
caloric restriction without actually
having to be hungry Wow and what kind of
dose are you giving these mice it was
the equivalent of about 250 milligrams a
day in a human okay so is 1/4 of what
you recommend people take right I don't
recommend people take anything but okay
what you take right let's just say that
yeah I don't recommendation sorry folks
yeah I'm taking a higher dose because
I've looked at human clinical data and I
think that a higher dose may be required
to have an even better effect on
longevity but the the results are very
clear when we opened up these mice maybe
I shouldn't have said that
when we examined those mice carefully uh
put them to put them to sleep for
scientific purposes it was clear that
they they were healthier now they were
still fat that was interesting that was
still fat so we figured the experiment
didn't work but their arteries were
clean their livers were like a healthy
lean young Mouse and when we looked at
their metabolism it was like a younger
Mouse so let me ask you this then
because you're you take statins if you
are fairly convinced because the
research of the positive benefits of
resveratrol in healthy aging and healthy
metabolism and their arteries why you
take in statins
because you know that there are some
negative effects of statins right well
if I had five lifetimes I'd probably try
that experiment okay I don't want to you
just don't want to risk it yeah is there
enough I mean have you looked through
the papers the the research papers on
statins and a little bit there is some
correlations with dementia and the brain
does need cholesterol so that that might
be one of the problems is your dad on
statins yes really we have a whole bunch
of genes that predispose 23 mate said
basically give up now Wow it's pretty
horrible so yeah if I make it to 80 I'm
doing pretty well Dean
interesting cuz um
Bourdain when he was alive he had made a
decision to take statins versus change
his diet this is before he got into
Jitsu when he was traveling the world
and eating the finest foods and drinking
wine to excess every night and join the
shit out of it you know we had a
conversation about it's like I would
rather eat well said I'd rather eat well
and take these drugs because I know the
side effects another dangerous so then
we have a conversation maybe two years
later he gets really energy to his wife
at the time was into jiu-jitsu and you
know she had convinced him to try it and
he went and tried it and immediately got
hooked and he has or he had a addictive
background you know first was heroin and
you know some other unfortunate
substances and then you know cigarettes
for a while he quit that and then
jiu-jitsu became his new addiction and
he got ripped I mean he really at I
think he started training at 58 or 59 he
started and then by the time he was 62
you know like a full six-pack it was
crazy to see like I'm like look at you
man this is nuts like there's an image
of him walking down the street and I
mean he has no shirt on and he's fucking
shredded got off all the statins got off
everything has changed his whole his
issue with cholesterol yeah good on him
just through daily exercise yeah I
should try oh yeah yeah a little bit of
shame that I haven't been able to get
off the statins but they just scare me
man I've just read too many things well
you know I could have gone off them when
I was on a really lean diet
I tried this Okinawa diet from Okinawa
okay now yeah so just fish mostly in and
and tofu mmm yeah how'd it go I was
great but then I had kids oh you can't
feed tofu the kids everyday right you
can't have separate food just for
yourself not gonna know I understand
yeah well you're yeah that's the thing
is like you're so limited by time you
know you're such an involved research
schedule and life schedule and travel
schedule I'm a pretty average guy I'm
not
militant about what I I try my best
every day data to do what I can but they
statin thing I just haven't had the
chance to do it but resveratrol I don't
think is sufficient to keep these
cholesterol levels down so combination
so far when you first got on the how
long you'd be on statins since 29 oh wow
so you really have been on them for 21
years not only that's super high dose so
he's eighty milligrams what's a normal
dose ten huh that's crazy yeah my doctor
one of the best at Harvard looked at my
genetics and said you're fucked Wow yeah
I've got all the wrong genes these tiny
little lipoprotein particles the ones
that oxidize so the fact that my
arteries apparently cleaners is good
good news for me well that's good news
like I said look good no thanks I mean
obviously there's a lot of biodiversity
when it comes to human beings and some
things that are bad for others yeah good
for some well I'm not losing my mind yet
it's still pretty functional when it
starts slipping away what you gonna do
ask your wife or your friends or what
you gonna do yeah what am I gonna do
what your dad's want to tell you yeah
that could have walk right
he's 85 so yeah my never changing
diapers yeah David you asked me the same
question three times in a row the way
it's going that could definitely happen
well do you get a lot of sleep I do now
now that I'm wondering it yeah what's a
lot of sleep for you between 6 & 7 hours
oh that's good dr. Matthew Walker was a
guy that I had on my podcast who studies
sleep and he was fascinating and it
changed my entire opinion about what's
necessary there's a direct correlation
between limited amounts of sleep and
Alzheimer's direct correlation he's like
it's one of the most established links
that you can see between a disease and a
cause I'm yes quoting it's an
association I mean I always wonder you
know I'm a scientist always have to be
skeptical sure as to whether if you're
predisposed Alzheimer's you have trouble
sleeping oh and you start taking ambien
now people say well ambien and
Alzheimer's are correlated well yeah
that maybe it's the other way around
yeah a me and scares the shit out of me
you don't take that do tiny bits Oh
that stuff's nuts because people take it
and they say things they don't know what
they're saying right well the
recommended dose at least it used to be
for men is 10 milligrams which is
massive i nibble on I take maybe a
milligram just to nod off if I'm
desperate with jet lag hmm but yeah I
peek doctor as many I know say the 10
milligrams is probably too high but
check with your doctor
yeah well Matthew Walker says stay the
fuck away from that stuff period he said
you're not getting real sleep anyway
you're not going in through full sleep
cycles you're just drugging your brain
into a state of unconsciousness probably
with 10 milligrams that make sense for
me because I'm monitoring it I know that
I'm getting good deep sleep have you
tried other like melatonin things along
those lines
I sure sure not effective uh not as much
sometimes melatonin with milligram of
ambien is necessary but what a big
change for me has been just don't stay
up watching TV get the screens off with
your glasses they really help
yeah the screens watching those goddamn
screens before you go to bed I love
doing it though I love watching TV show
before I go to sleep it's probably the
worst time to do it though right yeah it
is
it really uh I mean you can watch the
shows just put the yellow glasses on oh
you know the lue light-emitting yeah
blocking glasses one of my sponsors
movement watches they have they have
blue light-emitting glasses need to get
those on blocking or emitting block
blocking blue like blocking yeah yeah
not emitting how kind of glass I meant
you know blocking blue light emitting
signals yeah well you can have blue
light-emitting glasses - that'd be good
really well for the middle of winter oh
we're getting depressed yeah well where
you live has no real middle of winter
here buddy why you said you used to live
- yeah 95 escaped yeah it's it's pretty
tragic I mean like winter I want to kill
myself so it's that seasonal affective
disorder
sure yeah yeah yeah because I'm working
indoors at CSUN for months well that
gray sky when it's every day is gray
over and over again you see no real sky
for so long it's so weird
it yeah I miss Australia for that reason
mmm I get reinvigorated if I come out to
LA and it's blue sky you really feel
different oh for sure there's a reason
why this is a fucking billion people out
here but what is your strategy for
mitigating the impact of seasonal
affective disorder what I do I try to go
outdoors and get some some Sun in my
eyes when I can take vitamin D I'll for
sure very different I seem so help make
a difference yeah yeah so yeah vitamin D
it's it's questionable whether it's as
healthy as people thought it was that
said I think it at worst doesn't hurt
you
some people do Sun lamps for that reason
they'll go into a tanning booth for
their reason right they will actually
found this season I went to the sauna in
the cold shock bath and that really
helped a lot I don't know if it's
related but I needed to shock my body in
the middle of winter if you're just
sitting by a fire and barely moving
around I just felt like it was a sack of
shit and so you know a lot of people get
fat in the winter too that's another
thing they just they get indoors because
it sucks outside and they never wind up
doing anything and then you dealing
you're dealing with the depression of
being a little bit heavier to officer
and then you drinking like kind of stuff
but it's all about shock your body get
your body out of complacency and our
lifestyle everything we do everything we
buy everything on TV that's being
advertised to make your life better is
shortening your lifespan by making it
easier for our bodies to exist you don't
want that you gonna stress it yeah what
other things do you think that people
should be doing on a daily basis that
most folks aren't well we covered a lot
so there's the the be hungry get the
exercise there's all sorts of exercise
which are good but the main ones are
stretching in and running and lifting
okay cold and hot we've talked about and
then there's the supplements that mimic
the benefits of those plus probably more
things that's my that's my regimen
there's some other little tidbits that I
put in my book which it's a laundry list
of things that I found work for me but
those are the main things we've covered
this is Alan's probably pretty boring
but I'll say it again wear sunscreen for
two reasons I mean you look better
anyway
not that probably young people care but
it'll make a difference by the time
you're our age but also because DNA
damage does age you we think that it's
breaking the chromosomes and that's the
major driver of aging that son will do
that x-rays will do that maybe even
airport scanners certainly I'm not a
real a devotee of getting scanned I
thought there were radio waves are the
millimeter and they don't penetrate very
deeply so they're probably not too bad
but I've looked into it's about the same
radiation as you get on the flight and
given that I'm doing probably a million
miles a year I don't want to double the
amount of exposure so when you go
through that radio scanner then the more
modern TSA scanners they give you the
same amount of radiation as a flight
because a flight gives you the same
amount of radiation as multiple x-rays
right is it that I don't think is that
bad I believe it is well let's find out
how much radiation do you get on a
five-hour flight and is it comparable to
multiple x-rays because I believe that's
what I read well the x-rays I can say
definitively based on our research would
aid you age your tissues and what's it
doing to you
well it's breaking your chromosome and
causing that clock that I was talking
about earlier that biological clock to
accelerate is there something you can do
to mitigate that if you know you have to
get an x-ray should you do something
right afterwards potentially potentially
you could take in a man which we've
shown in male in mice protect them
against the effects of radiation and
that's one of the things we've talked to
NASA about for getting to Mars and back
safely so when I'm on a flight I take so
many men in the expectation that it's
gonna boost my body's ability to prevent
those changes to the clock
now is there a commercially available MN
that you would suggest if someone wants
to purchase it somewhere well so I don't
divulge company names and there's two
reasons for that one is I haven't tested
them so I actually literally don't know
but the other is that
um you know I want to stay above the
fray and I understand not yet involved
but it but there are if people want to
go google and go look online they can
find commercially available nmn right so
yeah again I've got number of pages in
the book on that so it's it's all laid
out but in summary this all right here
ladies and gentlemen look at life span
why we age and why we don't have to
thanks Jeff that's my NPR voice yeah
you can donate if you enjoy programming
like this putting me to sleep
that's made a vamp he's something
happened with people they thought to be
intelligent you have to talk like you're
ready to put people to sleep it's time
to get sleepy anyway so the enamine yeah
so there were people who's selling it on
the internet just just to get the facts
straight I don't sell anything I
understand my name's all over the
Internet if you see my name with a
company it's be us uh-huh beautiful
that's good anyway so the nmn there are
companies that sell it's more expensive
than another molecule that's related
called n R or nicotinamide Rui beside
which is also what the body can use to
boost energy levels and that's a little
bit cheaper and they've both been shown
in animals to be to boost the sirtuins
and help those animals be healthier in
old age and reverse some aspects of
aging like endurance loss of endurance
that kind of thing
protect the eye protect the hearing as
well so that we don't know if it works
in humans that let's be honest I don't
know if these things work but let's also
be honest we know what's gonna happen if
we don't do anything and that's not
pretty either do you have any high hopes
for things like CRISPR things where
there's going to be genetic alterations
and they are starting to do some
experience you have a big smile on your
face right now so I'll let you talk tell
me what's up well so I'm a geneticist
and I'm just down the hall from George
Church he's in my department at Harvard
and I'm a big believer in CRISPR in the
sense that it will revolutionize
medicine now right now explain it to
people who don't know which means so
CRISPR is an acronym
for basically a system that is from
bacteria that they use to kill and
destroy the DNA of invading organisms
like a virus but we can now use that
system to cut and change our own genomes
it's basically a DNA cutting enzyme that
doesn't cut randomly you can give it a
barcode in the form of what's called RNA
molecule that tells where that enzyme
will cut in the genome let's say you Joe
Rogan have a terrible gene that's
causing heart disease we take this
CRISPR system we say here's where you
need to go to cut we can tell the enzyme
to go and cut it put it into your cells
it'll go cut it and destroy that enzyme
and delete it and you can also use it to
cut the genome and insert new pieces so
you can both subtract and add DNA at
will now not just randomly but what's
important is you can tell it where to go
and that's the big breakthrough and
they're doing some experiments on human
beings I know there was something that
they were doing believes but somewhere
in Asia if I remember correctly I
believe was China where they had done
some manipulation to people to help
prevent AIDS and in the process of doing
so they may have boosted intelligence or
the potential for intelligence which was
so convoluted that my puny little brain
can't understand the study I was just I
had to go over the same paragraph like
four or five times just try to figure
out what the fuck they were saying am I
making any sense
yeah you are you are and that was a
study that that I don't believe it's
been published but it's been reported
right that he is his name his last name
is he
he took embryos and engineered them to
delete ccr5 gene which is required for
HIV to infect cells now that was we can
we most of us scientists think that that
was reckless for the fact that first of
all HIV isn't a huge risk in China to
one in a thousand chance of getting HIV
there are plenty other things other
things they that you could do that could
be more helpful let's say why not mutate
what's called PS k9 to prevent heart
disease which would probably have 50% to
kill the boys a boy so anyway it wasn't
the most risk benefit ratio modification
that that's one thing but the other is
we don't know what happens when you cut
genes in embryos does it have changes to
the DNA clock did it accelerate their
aging did it mess with other genes did
it cut in other places and screw up
those genes we don't know that yet and
so that's why the scientific community
had a negative reaction to it but what's
interesting is that the scientific
community and the press has pretty much
gone quiet on this imagine if this
happened during the Bush era we we'd
have protesters all over the place and
be outlawed and that hasn't happened and
I think it's because we live in a world
with a 24-hour news cycle though but
isn't that also because it's being if it
wasn't during the bush world
I mean where the protests would really
take place if it was done here the thing
about things that are done China or
overseas like huh it's like it's so far
away like wow let's keep an eye on them
yeah that's true there is the fear that
that some countries gonna engineer an
army of Solomons I mean know we have the
technology to do that right now yeah we
believe we understand how to slow aging
there are genes that predispose you to
too long life we could make offspring a
family that would potentially live a lot
longer but it's just something that can
only be manipulated in embryos or in
fetuses nor now we can do it in adults
actually there's there's a there are
drugs that are in development to
actually correct genetic diseases such
as vision loss really do my eyes are
gone I can barely read like print on a
laptop i I need glasses to read my
laptop alright so so we just put up a
study online on a site called bio walk I
have anyone can go there and see it just
google my name and bio archive VI o R X
IV reason that's interesting is that
what we're showing is in mice at least
we can reverse the age of the retina and
restore the vision of old mice what do I
have to do well I think you have to blow
me a few more today
come on man well lose your job let you
gotta let me crack those kind of jokes
sorry
Howard I was joking I started it folks
yeah it's not his fault but so what
would someone I mean is this gonna be
available to the general public anytime
in our lifetime I hustling my best we're
hoping to do clinical trials starting in
two years from now really and what would
you do in those clinical trials also
we'd reprogram the AI to be young again
so we now know that there's a set of
genes called reprogramming factors also
known as Yamanaka factors that are from
named after this Japanese fellow who won
the Nobel Prize in 2012 these factors
are used all over the world even
probably in high schools to reprogram
skin cells other cells to be what we
call pluripotent stem cells these are
cells that can be used to make new
organs or new blood cells mm-hmm but
what people hadn't tried until recently
was can you do this in a living animal
or a just gonna mess it up and what we
found out is that if you do it the wrong
way you mess up the animal and it'll die
but what we've shown for the first time
in this paper is you can do it in a safe
way and not only that reverse the clock
make the cells young and restore how
they work and get back vision and what's
the methodology right good question so
that the the current method is using a
virus that's on the market these are
called a AVS at denno associated viruses
you put them in the eye there are
already patients getting this in on the
market really yes SPARC therapeutics is
an example of a company that is curing
genetic diseases in the eye with viruses
we're in a new world most people don't
know about it Wow so what is the company
again Jamie we have this spark genetic
enemies already got it
look at that BAM motherfucker Jamie
Vernon in the house so these folks are
already doing this to people so is this
for people that are sort of desperate
and they'll try something experimental
right well they're desperate in the
sense that there's no other choice no
other cure
I mean we're now curing genetic diseases
someone was just treated and cured of
sickle cell anemia that's phenomenal
and that you know I learned that that
comes from malaria right
that was the idea that people were the
resistance to malaria it was that trait
from people that evolved in the area
where they would get malaria was also
what led to people getting sickle cell
correct correct so that I learned that
from Tiffany Haddish by the way amazing
Tiffany shoutout to Tiffany that Lux
turn of stuff is this something that
someone like me could take right now
no not easily your doctor would need to
prescribe it and so if he did prescribe
it I could literally get vision back
well this is not the same technology
that I'm talking about it from my lenses
inherited retinal diseases our
commitment to our IR DS this is gene
replacement not not reprogramming the
body to be young but it's the same virus
that we'd use to correct so they're
using this for certain retinal diseases
or they're correcting it now how is this
bacteria fixing your vision well the
viruses are just our age to get the
genes into the cells that's all and that
these are benign viruses they don't hurt
you but they're a carrier and it may be
eventually we'll have other ways to do
this but right now the virus is the best
way and in the mice to restore the
vision we have this three gene
combination of these Yamanaka
reprogramming genes we put them into the
eye and then we turn them on with a drug
in fact the same drug that I took when I
was in Africa called doxycycline is the
same drug we can feed to the mice turns
on the reprogramming genes for a few
weeks
restores their vision back to a young
Mouse and then we just take away the
doctor cyclin an antibiotic and the mice
have their vision back and how long does
it take for it starts deteriorating we
don't know yet
but a longer it's permanent because the
age of the cells has gone back those are
young eyes again so you might have a
whole full cycle from like 20 or 10 to
40 years old again that's the future
that you'll get a delivery of this virus
you'll take the antibiotic for a few
weeks be fully rejuvenated and the
doctor says come back in a couple of
decades we'll fix you again we'll give
you some antibiotic in a couple of
decades but then it gets really weird if
you have a if you engineer your children
to have the
system if that ever happens let's
imagine it could we could do this right
now with technology and you have people
engineered to be able to be reversed in
their age or let's say they have an
accident and their optic nerve gets
damaged or they lose the hearing from a
bomb or something that spinal injury
give him a dose of an IV of antibiotics
and they become just like an embryo they
can rejuvenate they can regrow the optic
nerve regrow their spine fixed back back
like new the the vision thing do you
think that we're gonna see that in our
lifetimes I mean is this something that
you're gonna see that's gonna be
available to the general public well so
so I've got I'm an entrepreneur as we
discussed before and also one of the
companies that I've started is exactly
that raised money to be able to make
this virus we're making it now takes a
few million bucks and will hopefully
with the FDA's approval injected into
people's eyes now first it won't just be
guys like you first of all we have to go
into an area where it's FDA approval
which is a disease like glaucoma which
is pressure in the eye or macular
degeneration that's our first goal but
then if it's safe why not do old eyes
what about people with injuries yeah
well yeah you could theoretically put it
into the spinal cord or give it give an
IV but people with eye injuries oh for
sure it's so one of the things we also
did in this paper that we've put online
is we pinched the optic nerve and what
normally happens is it just degrades I
mean nerves don't go back right unless
you're a baby mouse or a baby human but
we made those cells so young that the
optic nerve grew back to the brain Wow
first time that's been able I know a guy
from fighting he's got a detached retina
detached so bad that his vision and his
right eyes extremely poor shout out to
Michael Bisping do you think that that's
something that inside of his lifetime
they could see something the use of this
technology that could regenerate his eye
well you know I get a lot of email so
I'm not really trying to over promise
anything what I what I think is possible
is that initially will be used for
disease a chronic disease then it'll be
used for injuries like like that but
fresh injuries I think it's probably
to work better if it's fresh hmm I don't
know where this technology is going I
can imagine a lot we can all imagine
that you could get vision back and
people walking again but that's where
this technology is going we only but so
I described the discovery in the book as
actually what happened while I was
writing the book is were making these
discoveries and they were remarkable and
so we wrote them down in the book as we
went along so people can see how it
feels to be a scientist to make these
discoveries but it's only been a year or
less that we've known about this so
imagine 50 years from now what we can do
even ten it's gonna be a remarkable
future it's very exciting now what kind
of a timeline are you anticipating for
bringing this to you know people with
injuries
well injuries already we have a study
plan for spinal injury in mice and that
we'll probably know the results in less
than a year and then we could you know
as fast as the FDA allows us go into a
clinical trial now is the same scenario
applicable for people with spinal spinal
injuries as vision like people that have
a more recent spinal injury will be more
likely candidates than people that have
had older spinal injuries I think so
that would just be my guess that it's
easier to fix a recent recently damaged
system anything in the body that's fresh
but I wouldn't rule out anything when we
when we first discovered this the
experiment was to have a fresh injury
the pinching of the optic nerve but then
I said to my student why don't you just
try old mice and he said come on old
mice you kidding me how's that gonna
work
just try it just try it so he did it and
in collaboration with another lab at
Harvard so that they're the experts and
so bruce cassandra is his name
so Bruce called me professor at Harvard
it's 10:30 at night I just got off a
plane he said David you won't believe it
I didn't believe it I just looked at the
data it frickin worked old mice is sing
again he said I want to go down to the
FDA and tell them about it because right
now I diseases typically all you can do
is slow them down and he is actually a
reversal of lost function now this apply
to injuries as well do you believe old
injuries or just old macular
degeneration we haven't tried old
injuries but now Michael we've done
glaucoma which is an old injury
okay so theoretically what we could do
is at least with the existing nodes if
they're still attached we should be able
to rejuvenate those and make them work
better because he has some vision in his
eye so yeah so that's possible that that
makes more sense but very little very
limited in what I yeah well we'll have
to see interesting because you didn't
think I was gonna work on the old mice I
did but he jested Wow crazy
well we're literally reversing not just
the effects of aging but aging itself so
if I gave you those retinas very little
retinas here you go John and you're a
scientist you could look at that retina
and analyze it molecularly measure its
clock and you'd say those a young young
eyes and you wouldn't know the
difference now do you feel like this
kind of technology is also going to be
applied to people's skin because you
know one of the things that for women
it's devastating when they develop
wrinkles you know they fucking hate it
men get a few wrinkles they kind of look
distinguished you know but man when
women get wrinkles they freak the fuck
out they don't like it yeah we're gonna
try it on on aging on the skin though
you know when I talk about making people
walk again potentially mm-hmm it's
probably a higher prayer oh for sure but
I think it's feasible so there's a lab
at the Salk Institute
Juan Carlos Belmonte who may win the
Nobel Prize for his work on this in 2016
and a couple of years since he's been
showing that it doesn't just rejuvenate
old mice it actually is also
rejuvenating the skin if he puts it on a
wound that's in an old mouse that Mouse
would hit will heal better now that
doesn't prove wrinkles but it does prove
the skin can be rejuvenated as well so
there could be possibly some sort of a
treatment into skin maybe a reinjure in
you there's this thing that they do I
think it's called a vampire facial have
you ever heard of that they take
platelet-rich plasma and then they micro
needle your entire face and then they
somehow or another apply this
platelet-rich plasma to the areas that
have been micro needled and it has some
sort of an effect and increasing
collagen and elasticity of the skin and
tightening of the skin have you heard of
this
I've heard it for hair loss I didn't
realize people get it all over their
face for hair loss is while they're
doing that it sounds painful so to me it
makes sense that it might work the plate
the PRP is as it's called is full of
factors that we we we know some of these
are rejuvenating in mice
you know this the system where you can
hook up an old mouse and a young mouse
circulation yes and you get rejuvenation
there are factors that many of which we
haven't discovered or identified that
exists that you can rejuvenate and I
would bet that they're working most
likely through this reversal of the
clock and so one of the things we're
doing in my lab is taking what are
called exosomes which exist in these
preparations and seeing if they reverse
the clock I've had exosomes shot into
injuries for stem-cell procedures yes
yes did work that make sense yeah I had
a full length rotator cuff tear that's
completely gone yes so maybe what's
going on is you're free programs your
body there yes well there's it's a weird
thing
the exosomes and stem cells and there's
a new product called Wharton's jelly
that's also very effective and potent
because there's no papers on these
things it's all you know the research on
is some of it's a little shaky but the
efficacy at least anecdotal efficacy is
pretty substantial and I'm one of those
pieces of anecdotal evidence I've had a
bunch of shots I just whenever I get
injured my shoot it up yeah well your
listeners may not know about exosomes so
exosomes are little compartments that
are pinched off from cells and put into
the body and communicate between cells
across so your liver can communicate
with your brain you know for exosomes
and within these little cargoes there
are things that we're just discovering
little proteins RNA and they're full of
goodies and frog companies are being
built on these X's ohm's yes I'm glad
you brought up the study of the old mice
and the young mice where they put the
blood and the old mice and then the old
mice started behaving like young mice
and the blood of the old mice the young
mice and the young mice started behaving
like they were tired because there's a
company in Northern California that's
supposedly doing this
with humans where they're injecting
people with the blood of old people's or
young people rather some sort of
transfusion not anymore not anymore they
out of business well my understanding is
the FDA sent Bellator uh-huh I said stop
it that's it just a letter it's all
tanks oh yeah you don't want to go to
the mix down the street and change your
name oh I got another way down the
street change my name
I think that's risky is it check to see
if that companies under I'll I do not
remember the name of it but I remember
they were erroneously linked to Peter
teal and then Peter denied that he's
ever used that you know the billionaire
founder of PayPal who I've met it's a
wonderful man
they erroneously someone is some story
linked they said that he's at getting it
he's like actually shut the fuck up no
I'm not don't say that I've never done
it not doing it so it was one of those
things where there was a lot of legend
to it because of these my studies these
my studies got people super excited
about the idea that all you have to do
is get young people's blood so you get a
bunch of people with healthy disease
free drug free donating their plasma
doing their blood for X amount of
dollars a quart right you have a blood
boy okay yeah blood boy hey man when I
was young I needed some cash I was
healthy come on regenerate that shit
yeah you know take a quart of blood I
get it back in a couple of hours I think
it might work it's just that we don't
know the consequences and the FDA's job
is to protect us yeah just like they're
protecting us raw milk bunch of pussies
just recently shut down about a month
ago I missed the boat could have been in
there man but if you did that that's
something that you'd have to do on a
routine basis right it's not like
something you do one one shot probably
give you like a little boost for a short
amount of time yeah well that's what's
different about this reprogramming you
do it once you come back in years
yeah the eyeball thing is very enticing
to me because it's so weird watching my
eyes deteriorate like slowly but surely
I'm watching it happen it's really it
sucks and it's a sure sign you getting
older too man yeah age-related macular
degeneration just seems pretty standard
except my friend cam Haines that
motherfucker he's 52 years old he could
see
like 2018 vision of 52 it's crazy see
anything I dropped my phone on the
ground he's like I you got a crack he
saw it from like a where where's the
crack I'm trying to look at it in lights
like right there and I put reading
glasses on like son of a bitch like how
the fuck did you see that he saw it from
like where you are like looking at the
phone like that is crazy
well said so let's keep in touch we will
and yes if we get this on the market
then uh-huh yeah yes it turns out he has
started up again as recent pretty
recently but it's not being sold as
Youngblood for plasma it's just plasma
so just a shot bro is here some just uh
no promises what you think want to go in
there with me right after we do the
cryotherapy treatment let's get some
blood some young blood
doctors behind failed anti-aging blood
clinic tries again we tried to ask him
some questions but he was very evasive
good for you sir
duck and move do the old Muhammad Ali
rope-a-dope be like Pernell Whitaker sir
yeah I hope he stays evasive I mean it's
also like maybe it's nonsense maybe it's
not would you like to do Studies on
people that are doing that and find out
I mean well what they should do is
measure the clock now that we yes right
yes that would be interesting but based
on what we know about how it works with
mice you think it's likely that there is
some effect it's possible it's possible
I like a very cautious
you're a real professor I like that's
right you know you're the real deal I'd
like to keep my job
Diane you should just stop making those
blowjob jokes funny that that is
actually controversial two friends can't
just joke is there anything else that
you think is promising that is on the
horizon or that's being discussed or its
theoretical at this point yeah there's
something that is really interesting and
that's called sena lytx Sano Linux yeah
so Senna lytx are drugs that kill off
cinesn
cells so what our senescence cells these
are often called zombie cells and what I
think is - World War Z yes a lot of
zombies this podcast so senescence cells
we've known for decades exist in the
body but what was not clear was whether
they cause aging now it's pretty clear
from animal studies at least is that we
get lots of these accumulating and that
they do cause aging and one of the best
experiments that was Donna from Mayo
Clinic was to genetically delete the
senescence cells that accumulated in an
old mouse and it became young again or
at least a delayed its aging by fair bit
now senescence cells are pretty rare
though it's not a lot of them but they
cause havoc because they don't just sit
there in the body but they send out
these inflammatory markers and they
cause cancer we think so you want to get
rid of these just I want to mention that
in the biological clock when I was
saying that the the clock is part of the
aging process what we think is that as
we get older that and it's it's detailed
a lot more in my book so if people read
it they'll understand a lot more what
I'm saying but this this clock is
messing up the cell's ability to be what
it used to be what I mean by that let's
take your eye in your retina your nerves
are getting older but your nerves we
think are losing the ability to read the
nerve genes so they're forgetting that
their nerves so now they're starting to
behave actually more like a skin cell
and having a skin cell in your eyes not
going to really work very well so that
we call that epigenetic noise epigenetic
aging reprogramming resets that so why
is that interesting we think that the
ultimate problem for the cell when it
loses its total identity or gets a long
way towards that is it shuts itself down
because it says fuck I don't even know
what I am anymore I'm not a nervous
element of skin cell I'm not a liver
cell sin s sin s means stop dividing
just sit there and tell the body come
kill me mmm so now they're putting out
these panic factors there's a problem
you get inflammation the problem is that
as we get older the body's not very good
at clearing out these cells they sit
there and they wreak havoc yet
inflammation we think you get aging so
getting back to
analytics these drugs are designed to be
a pill or an injection into your joint
to kill off these zombie cells these
senescent cells and theoretically
rejuvenate the tissue and reverse that
aspect of aging and that's another
treatment like reprogramming that could
be a one-shot delivery and take you back
a decade Wow and how far away are we
from seeing those much closer actually
there's a few companies there's one
called unity there's one that I'm
involved with in full disclosure called
Sena lytic therapeutics in Europe and
they're in at least unity is in clinical
trials right now for osteoarthritis
really now what about the company in
Europe preclinical still Mouse Wow so
we're looking at like a decade from the
general public or well the unity they
hope not usually when you're in a phase
two study which they're in it's a few
years away if it works oh wow amazing
stuff it's such a cool time to see all
this medical innovation and
technological innovation well my head
spinning
yeah as CRISPR and then the
reprogramming which is new stuff this is
stuff that we dreamed of yeah thousands
of years and you know I don't think it's
a dead end and it may not be as you know
we're not gonna go back to being 20
anytime soon that said I think we've
we've had a major breakthrough the
equivalent I like to use is we figured
out how to fly where the Wright brothers
the right sisters we've got got include
basics is now my daughter will tell
right non-binary people yeah so my
daughter changed her name by the way -
what - Alexander
she was Madeline she didn't think that
was appropriate why she's a tough chick
uh she's a day and so I'm not allowed to
call her a she I don't think she doesn't
want to be identified as one or the
other interesting she's 16 if she
changed it at 11
whoa she's a tough girl you know in my
family we tend to be rebels and
unfortunately it passed along I'm
getting everything back fortunately or
unfortunately well I guess I'll be proud
of her but raising her the last few
years have been pretty annoying I can't
say anything without
the PR police she's that's hilarious
it's a PC police or PR did I say PR I
made a PC yeah that's interesting
uh what was I saying about my daughter
Oh about the the name change yes why was
it talking about a name change I don't
know you tell me
Jamie's you remember people screaming at
us
yeah well you were talking about so many
exciting things on the horizon yeah true
yeah
and so that it's it just head spinning
and so much is happening in our lifetime
that I thought was just imaginary or the
future now the question is are we gonna
reap all the benefits of this or we're
gonna be the last generation to lead a
normal human lifespan and not anything
we are I think that we already have
things we can do in our daily lives just
in lifestyle and in molecules you can
take that give us a very good chance of
living beyond what's naturally possible
this is amazing man such it's it's so
exciting and the last time you here was
about a year somewhere around that range
yeah yeah I mean and think about how
many new things you have to discuss now
versus then it's really interesting man
and I'm so happy there's people like you
that are out there doing this it's just
it's so it's just so exciting and it's
so it makes me very happy to know you're
out there
Thanks so thank you and your book people
can find out all this stuff in detail
much more detailed you can get a
two-and-a-half hour conversation life
span why we age and why we don't have to
David a Sinclair PhD thank you brother
always a good time we'll do it again
next year deal yes
bye everybody
[Music]